{"id": "10101", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10101", "title": "Eugene Wigner", "text": "Eugene Paul Wigner (, ; November 17, 1902 \u2013 January 1, 1995) was a Hungarian-American theoretical physicist who also contributed to mathematical physics. He received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1963 \"for his contributions to the theory of the atomic nucleus and the elementary particles, particularly through the discovery and application of fundamental symmetry principles\".\nA graduate of the Technical Hochschule Berlin (now Technische Universit\u00e4t Berlin), Wigner worked as an assistant to Karl Weissenberg and Richard Becker at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Berlin, and David Hilbert at the University of G\u00f6ttingen. Wigner and Hermann Weyl were responsible for introducing group theory into physics, particularly the theory of symmetry in physics. Along the way he performed ground-breaking work in pure mathematics, in which he authored a number of mathematical theorems. In particular, Wigner's theorem is a cornerstone in the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. He is also known for his research into the structure of the atomic nucleus. In 1930, Princeton University recruited Wigner, along with John von Neumann, and he moved to the United States, where he obtained citizenship in 1937.\nWigner participated in a meeting with Leo Szilard and Albert Einstein that resulted in the Einstein\u2013Szilard letter, which prompted President Franklin D. Roosevelt to authorize the creation of the Advisory Committee on Uranium with the purpose of investigating the feasibility of nuclear weapons. Wigner was afraid that the German nuclear weapon project would develop an atomic bomb first. During the Manhattan Project, he led a team whose task was to design nuclear reactors to convert uranium into weapons grade plutonium. At the time, reactors existed only on paper, and no reactor had yet gone critical. Wigner was disappointed that DuPont was given responsibility for the detailed design of the reactors, not just their construction. He became director of research and development at the Clinton Laboratory (now the Oak Ridge National Laboratory) in early 1946, but became frustrated with bureaucratic interference by the Atomic Energy Commission, and returned to Princeton.\nIn the postwar period, he served on a number of government bodies, including the National Bureau of Standards from 1947 to 1951, the mathematics panel of the National Research Council from 1951 to 1954, the physics panel of the National Science Foundation, and the influential General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission from 1952 to 1957 and again from 1959 to 1964. In later life, he became more philosophical, and published \"The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences\", his best-known work outside technical mathematics and physics.\nEarly life and education.\nWigner Jen\u0151 P\u00e1l was born in Budapest, Austria-Hungary on November 17, 1902, to middle class Jewish parents, Elisabeth Elsa Einhorn and Antal Anton Wigner, a leather tanner. He had an older sister, Berta, known as Biri, and a younger sister Margit, known as Manci, who later married British theoretical physicist Paul Dirac. He was home schooled by a professional teacher until the age of 9, when he started school at the third grade. During this period, Wigner developed an interest in mathematical problems. At the age of 11, Wigner contracted what his doctors believed to be tuberculosis. His parents sent him to live for six weeks in a sanatorium in the Austrian mountains, before the doctors concluded that the diagnosis was mistaken.\nWigner's family was Jewish, but not religiously observant, and his Bar Mitzvah was a secular one. From 1915 through 1919, he studied at the secondary grammar school called Fasori Evang\u00e9likus Gimn\u00e1zium, the school his father had attended. Religious education was compulsory, and he attended classes in Judaism taught by a rabbi. A fellow student was J\u00e1nos von Neumann, who was a year behind Wigner. They both benefited from the instruction of the noted mathematics teacher L\u00e1szl\u00f3 R\u00e1tz. In 1919, to escape the B\u00e9la Kun communist regime, the Wigner family briefly fled to Austria, returning to Hungary after Kun's downfall. Partly as a reaction to the prominence of Jews in the Kun regime, the family converted to Lutheranism. Wigner explained later in his life that his family decision to convert to Lutheranism \"was not at heart a religious decision but an anti-communist one\".\nAfter graduating from the secondary school in 1920, Wigner enrolled at the Budapest University of Technical Sciences, known as the \"M\u0171egyetem\". He was not happy with the courses on offer, and in 1921 enrolled at the \"Technische Hochschule Berlin\" (now Technische Universit\u00e4t Berlin), where he studied chemical engineering. He also attended the Wednesday afternoon colloquia of the German Physical Society. These colloquia featured leading researchers including Max Planck, Max von Laue, Rudolf Ladenburg, Werner Heisenberg, Walther Nernst, Wolfgang Pauli, and Albert Einstein. Wigner also met the physicist Le\u00f3 Szil\u00e1rd, who at once became Wigner's closest friend. A third experience in Berlin was formative. Wigner worked at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry (now the Fritz Haber Institute), and there he met Michael Polanyi, who became, after L\u00e1szl\u00f3 R\u00e1tz, Wigner's greatest teacher. Polanyi supervised Wigner's DSc thesis, \"Bildung und Zerfall von Molek\u00fclen\" (\"Formation and Decay of Molecules\").\nMiddle years.\nWigner returned to Budapest, where he went to work at his father's tannery, but in 1926, he accepted an offer from Karl Weissenberg at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Berlin. Weissenberg wanted someone to assist him with his work on X-ray crystallography, and Polanyi had recommended Wigner. After six months as Weissenberg's assistant, Wigner went to work for Richard Becker for two semesters. Wigner explored quantum mechanics, studying the work of Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger. He also delved into the group theory of Ferdinand Frobenius and Eduard Ritter von Weber.\nWigner received a request from Arnold Sommerfeld to work at the University of G\u00f6ttingen as an assistant to the great mathematician David Hilbert. This proved a disappointment, as the aged Hilbert's abilities were failing, and his interests had shifted to logic. Wigner nonetheless studied independently. He laid the foundation for the theory of symmetries in quantum mechanics and in 1927 introduced what is now known as the Wigner D-matrix. Wigner and Hermann Weyl were responsible for introducing group theory into quantum mechanics. The latter had written a standard text, \"Group Theory and Quantum Mechanics\" (1928), but it was not easy to understand, especially for younger physicists. Wigner's \"Group Theory and Its Application to the Quantum Mechanics of Atomic Spectra\" (1931) made group theory accessible to a wider audience.\nIn these works, Wigner laid the foundation for the theory of symmetries in quantum mechanics. Wigner's theorem, proven by him in 1931, is a cornerstone of the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. The theorem specifies how physical symmetries such as rotations, translations, and CPT symmetry are represented on the Hilbert space of states. According to the theorem, any symmetry transformation is represented by a linear and unitary or antilinear and antiunitary transformation of Hilbert space. The representation of a symmetry group on a Hilbert space is either an ordinary representation or a projective representation.\nIn the late 1930s, Wigner extended his research into atomic nuclei. By 1929, his papers were drawing notice in the world of physics. In 1930, Princeton University recruited Wigner for a one-year lectureship, at 7 times the salary that he had been drawing in Europe. Princeton recruited von Neumann at the same time. Jen\u0151 P\u00e1l Wigner and J\u00e1nos von Neumann had collaborated on three papers together in 1928 and two in 1929. They anglicized their first names to \"Eugene\" and \"John\", respectively. When their year was up, Princeton offered a five-year contract as visiting professors for half the year. The Technische Hochschule responded with a teaching assignment for the other half of the year. This was very timely, since the Nazis soon rose to power in Germany. At Princeton in 1934, Wigner introduced his sister Margit \"Manci\" Wigner to the physicist Paul Dirac, with whom she remarried.\nPrinceton did not rehire Wigner when his contract ran out in 1936. Through Gregory Breit, Wigner found new employment at the University of Wisconsin. There, he met his first wife, Amelia Frank, who was a physics student there. However, she died unexpectedly in 1937, leaving Wigner distraught. He therefore accepted an offer in 1938 from Princeton to return there. Wigner became a naturalized citizen of the United States on January 8, 1937, and he brought his parents to the United States.\nManhattan Project.\nAlthough he was a professed political amateur, on August 2, 1939, he participated in a meeting with Le\u00f3 Szil\u00e1rd and Albert Einstein that resulted in the Einstein\u2013Szil\u00e1rd letter, which prompted President Franklin D. Roosevelt to authorize the creation of the Advisory Committee on Uranium with the purpose of investigating the feasibility of atomic bombs. Wigner was afraid that the German nuclear weapon project would develop an atomic bomb first, and even refused to have his fingerprints taken because they could be used to track him down if Germany won. \"Thoughts of being murdered,\" he later recalled, \"focus your mind wonderfully.\"\nOn June 4, 1941, Wigner married his second wife, Mary Annette Wheeler, a professor of physics at Vassar College, who had completed her Ph.D. at Yale University in 1932. After the war she taught physics on the faculty of Rutgers University's Douglass College in New Jersey until her retirement in 1964. They remained married until her death in November 1977. They had two children, David Wigner and Martha Wigner Upton.\nDuring the Manhattan Project, Wigner led a team that included J. Ernest Wilkins Jr., Alvin M. Weinberg, Katharine Way, Gale Young and Edward Creutz. The group's task was to design the production nuclear reactors that would convert uranium into weapons grade plutonium. At the time, reactors existed only on paper, and no reactor had yet gone critical. In July 1942, Wigner chose a conservative 100 MW design, with a graphite neutron moderator and water cooling. Wigner was present at a converted rackets court under the stands at the University of Chicago's abandoned Stagg Field on December 2, 1942, when the world's first atomic reactor, Chicago Pile One (CP-1) achieved a controlled nuclear chain reaction.\nWigner was disappointed that DuPont was given responsibility for the detailed design of the reactors, not just their construction. He threatened to resign in February 1943, but was talked out of it by the head of the Metallurgical Laboratory, Arthur Compton, who sent him on vacation instead. As it turned out, a design decision by DuPont to give the reactor additional load tubes for more uranium saved the project when neutron poisoning became a problem. Without the additional tubes, the reactor could have been run at 35% power until the boron impurities in the graphite were burned up and enough plutonium produced to run the reactor at full power; but this would have set the project back a year. During the 1950s, he would even work for DuPont on the Savannah River Site. Wigner did not regret working on the bomb, remarking:\nAn important discovery Wigner made during the project was the Wigner effect. This is a swelling of the graphite moderator caused by the displacement of atoms by neutron radiation. The Wigner effect was a serious problem for the reactors at the Hanford Site in the immediate post-war period, and resulted in production cutbacks and a reactor being shut down entirely. It was eventually discovered that it could be overcome by controlled heating and annealing.\nThrough Manhattan project funding, Wigner and Leonard Eisenbud also developed an important general approach to nuclear reactions, the Wigner\u2013Eisenbud R-matrix theory, which was published in 1947.\nLater years.\nWigner was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1944 and the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1945. He accepted a position as the director of research and development at the Clinton Laboratory (now the Oak Ridge National Laboratory) in Oak Ridge, Tennessee in early 1946. Because he did not want to be involved in administrative duties, he became co-director of the laboratory, with James Lum handling the administrative chores as executive director. When the newly created Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) took charge of the laboratory's operations at the start of 1947, Wigner feared that many of the technical decisions would be made in Washington. He also saw the Army's continuation of wartime security policies at the laboratory as a \"meddlesome oversight\", interfering with research. One such incident occurred in March 1947, when the AEC discovered that Wigner's scientists were conducting experiments with a critical mass of uranium-235 when the director of the Manhattan Project, Major General Leslie R. Groves, Jr., had forbidden such experiments in August 1946 after the death of Louis Slotin at the Los Alamos Laboratory. Wigner argued that Groves's order had been superseded, but was forced to terminate the experiments, which were completely different from the one that killed Slotin.\nFeeling unsuited to a managerial role in such an environment, he left Oak Ridge in 1947 and returned to Princeton University, although he maintained a consulting role with the facility for many years. In the postwar period, he served on a number of government bodies, including the National Bureau of Standards from 1947 to 1951, the mathematics panel of the National Research Council from 1951 to 1954, the physics panel of the National Science Foundation, and the influential General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission from 1952 to 1957 and again from 1959 to 1964. He also contributed to civil defense.\nWigner was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1950.\nNear the end of his life, Wigner's thoughts turned more philosophical. In 1960, he published a now classic article on the philosophy of mathematics and of physics, which has become his best-known work outside technical mathematics and physics, \"The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences\". He argued that biology and cognition could be the origin of physical concepts, as we humans perceive them, and that the happy coincidence that mathematics and physics were so well matched, seemed to be \"unreasonable\" and hard to explain. His original paper has provoked and inspired many responses across a wide range of disciplines. These included Richard Hamming in Computer Science, Arthur Lesk in Molecular Biology, Peter Norvig in data mining, Max Tegmark in Physics, Ivor Grattan-Guinness in Mathematics, and Vela Velupillai in Economics.\nTurning to philosophical questions about the theory of quantum mechanics, Wigner developed a thought experiment (later called Wigner's Friend paradox) to illustrate his belief that consciousness is foundational to the quantum mechanical measurement process. He thereby followed an ontological approach that sets human's consciousness at the center: \"All that quantum mechanics purports to provide are probability connections between subsequent impressions (also called 'apperceptions') of the consciousness\".\nMeasurements are understood as the interactions which create the impressions in our consciousness (and as a result modify the wave function of the \"measured\" physical system), an idea which has been called the \"consciousness causes collapse\" interpretation.\nInterestingly, Hugh Everett III (a student of Wigner's) discussed Wigner's thought experiment in the introductory part of his 1957 dissertation as an \"amusing, but \"extremely hypothetical\" drama\". In an early draft of Everett's work, one also finds a drawing of the Wigner's Friend situation, which must be seen as the first evidence on paper of the thought experiment that was later assigned to be Wigner's. This suggests that Everett must at least have discussed the problem together with Wigner.\nIn November 1963, Wigner called for the allocation of 10% of the national defense budget to be spent on nuclear blast shelters and survival resources, arguing that such an expenditure would be less costly than disarmament. Wigner considered a recent Woods Hole study's conclusion that a nuclear strike would kill 20% of Americans to be a very modest projection and that the country could recover from such an attack more quickly than Germany had recovered from the devastation of World War II.\nWigner was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1963 \"for his contributions to the theory of the atomic nucleus and the elementary particles, particularly through the discovery and application of fundamental symmetry principles\". The prize was shared that year, with the other half of the award divided between Maria Goeppert-Mayer and J. Hans D. Jensen. Wigner professed that he had never considered the possibility that this might occur, and added: \"I never expected to get my name in the newspapers without doing something wicked.\" He also won the Franklin Medal in 1950, the Enrico Fermi award in 1958, the Atoms for Peace Award in 1959, the Max Planck Medal in 1961, the National Medal of Science in 1969, the Albert Einstein Award in 1972, the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 1974, the eponymous Wigner Medal in 1978, and the Herzl Prize in 1982. In 1968 he gave the Josiah Willard Gibbs lecture.\nAfter his retirement from Princeton in 1971, Wigner prepared the first edition of Symmetries and Reflections, a collection of philosophical essays, and became more involved in international and political meetings; around this time he became a leader and vocal defender of the Unification Church's annual International Conference on the Unity of the Sciences.\nMary died in November 1977. In 1979, Wigner married his third wife, Eileen Clare-Patton (Pat) Hamilton (1915-2010), the widow of physicist Donald Ross Hamilton, the dean of the graduate school at Princeton University, who had died in 1972. In 1992, at the age of 90, he published his memoirs, \"The Recollections of Eugene P. Wigner\" with Andrew Szanton. In it, Wigner said: \"The full meaning of life, the collective meaning of all human desires, is fundamentally a mystery beyond our grasp. As a young man, I chafed at this state of affairs. But by now I have made peace with it. I even feel a certain honor to be associated with such a mystery.\" In his collection of essays 'Philosophical Reflections and Syntheses' (1995), he commented: \"It was not possible to formulate the laws of quantum mechanics in a fully consistent way without reference to consciousness.\"\nWigner was credited as a member of the advisory board for the Western Goals Foundation, a private domestic intelligence agency created in the US in 1979 to \"fill the critical gap caused by the crippling of the FBI, the disabling of the House Un-American Activities Committee and the destruction of crucial government files\".\nWigner died of pneumonia at the University Medical Center in Princeton, New Jersey on 1 January 1995."}
{"id": "10103", "revid": "41814246", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10103", "title": "Electroweak interaction", "text": "In particle physics, the electroweak interaction or electroweak force is the unified description of two of the fundamental interactions of nature: electromagnetism (electromagnetic interaction) and the weak interaction. Although these two forces appear very different at everyday low energies, the theory models them as two different aspects of the same force. Above the unification energy, on the order of 246\u00a0GeV, they would merge into a single force. Thus, if the temperature is high enough \u2013 approximately 1015\u00a0K \u2013 then the electromagnetic force and weak force merge into a combined electroweak force.\nDuring the quark epoch (shortly after the Big Bang), the electroweak force split into the electromagnetic and weak force. It is thought that the required temperature of 1015\u00a0K has not been seen widely throughout the universe since before the quark epoch, and currently the highest human-made temperature in thermal equilibrium is around (from the Large Hadron Collider).\nSheldon Glashow, Abdus Salam, and Steven Weinberg were awarded the 1979 Nobel Prize in Physics for their contributions to the unification of the weak and electromagnetic interaction between elementary particles, known as the Weinberg\u2013Salam theory. The existence of the electroweak interactions was experimentally established in two stages, the first being the discovery of neutral currents in neutrino scattering by the Gargamelle collaboration in 1973, and the second in 1983 by the UA1 and the UA2 collaborations that involved the discovery of the W and Z gauge bosons in proton\u2013antiproton collisions at the converted Super Proton Synchrotron. In 1999, Gerardus 't Hooft and Martinus Veltman were awarded the Nobel prize for showing that the electroweak theory is renormalizable.\nHistory.\nAfter the Wu experiment in 1956 discovered parity violation in the weak interaction, a search began for a way to relate the weak and electromagnetic interactions. Extending his doctoral advisor Julian Schwinger's work, Sheldon Glashow first experimented with introducing two different symmetries, one chiral and one achiral, and combined them such that their overall symmetry was unbroken. This did not yield a renormalizable theory, and its gauge symmetry had to be broken by hand as no spontaneous mechanism was known, but it predicted a new particle, the Z boson. This received little notice, as it matched no experimental finding.\nIn 1964, Salam and John Clive Ward had the same idea, but predicted a massless photon and three massive gauge bosons with a manually broken symmetry. Later around 1967, while investigating spontaneous symmetry breaking, Weinberg found a set of symmetries predicting a massless, neutral gauge boson. Initially rejecting such a particle as useless, he later realized his symmetries produced the electroweak force, and he proceeded to predict rough masses for the W and Z bosons. Significantly, he suggested this new theory was renormalizable. In 1971, Gerard 't Hooft proved that spontaneously broken gauge symmetries are renormalizable even with massive gauge bosons.\nFormulation.\nMathematically, electromagnetism is unified with the weak interactions as a Yang\u2013Mills field with an gauge group, which describes the formal operations that can be applied to the electroweak gauge fields without changing the dynamics of the system. These fields are the weak isospin fields , , and , and the weak hypercharge field .\nThis invariance is known as electroweak symmetry.\nThe generators of SU(2) and U(1) are given the name weak isospin (labeled ) and weak hypercharge (labeled ) respectively. These then give rise to the gauge bosons that mediate the electroweak interactions \u2013 the three bosons of weak isospin (, , and ), and the boson of weak hypercharge, respectively, all of which are \"initially\" massless. These are not physical fields yet, before spontaneous symmetry breaking and the associated Higgs mechanism.\nIn the Standard Model, the observed physical particles, the and bosons, and the photon, are produced through the spontaneous symmetry breaking of the electroweak symmetry SU(2) \u00d7 U(1) to U(1), effected by the Higgs mechanism (see also Higgs boson), an elaborate quantum-field-theoretic phenomenon that \"spontaneously\" alters the realization of the symmetry and rearranges degrees of freedom.\nThe electric charge arises as the particular linear combination (nontrivial) of (weak hypercharge) and the component of weak isospin (formula_1) that does \"not\" couple to the Higgs boson. That is to say: the Higgs and the electromagnetic field have no effect on each other, at the level of the fundamental forces (\"tree level\"), while any \"other\" combination of the hypercharge and the weak isospin must interact with the Higgs. This causes an apparent separation between the weak force, which interacts with the Higgs, and electromagnetism, which does not. Mathematically, the electric charge is a specific combination of the hypercharge and outlined in the figure.\n (the symmetry group of electromagnetism only) is defined to be the group generated by this special linear combination, and the symmetry described by the group is unbroken, since it does not \"directly\" interact with the Higgs.\nThe above spontaneous symmetry breaking makes the and bosons coalesce into two different physical bosons with different masses \u2013 the boson, and the photon (),\nwhere is the \"weak mixing angle\". The axes representing the particles have essentially just been rotated, in the (, ) plane, by the angle . This also introduces a mismatch between the mass of the and the mass of the particles (denoted as and , respectively),\nThe and bosons, in turn, combine to produce the charged massive bosons :\nLagrangian.\nBefore electroweak symmetry breaking.\nThe Lagrangian for the electroweak interactions is divided into four parts before electroweak symmetry breaking becomes manifest,\nThe formula_6 term describes the interaction between the three vector bosons and the vector boson, \nwhere formula_8 (formula_9) and formula_10 are the field strength tensors for the weak isospin and weak hypercharge gauge fields.\nformula_11 is the kinetic term for the Standard Model fermions. The interaction of the gauge bosons and the fermions are through the gauge covariant derivative,\nwhere the subscript sums over the three generations of fermions; , , and are the left-handed doublet, right-handed singlet up, and right handed singlet down quark fields; and and are the left-handed doublet and right-handed singlet electron fields.\nThe Feynman slash formula_13 means the contraction of the 4-gradient with the Dirac matrices, defined as\nand the covariant derivative (excluding the gluon gauge field for the strong interaction) is defined as\nHere formula_16 is the weak hypercharge and the formula_17 are the components of the weak isospin.\nThe formula_18 term describes the Higgs field formula_19 and its interactions with itself and the gauge bosons,\nwhere formula_21 is the vacuum expectation value.\nThe formula_22 term describes the Yukawa interaction with the fermions, \nand generates their masses, manifest when the Higgs field acquires a nonzero vacuum expectation value, discussed next. The formula_24 for formula_25 are matrices of Yukawa couplings.\nAfter electroweak symmetry breaking.\nThe Lagrangian reorganizes itself as the Higgs field acquires a non-vanishing vacuum expectation value dictated by the potential of the previous section. As a result of this rewriting, the symmetry breaking becomes manifest. In the history of the universe, this is believed to have happened shortly after the hot big bang, when the universe was at a temperature \n(assuming the Standard Model of particle physics).\nDue to its complexity, this Lagrangian is best described by breaking it up into several parts as follows.\nThe kinetic term formula_27 contains all the quadratic terms of the Lagrangian, which include the dynamic terms (the partial derivatives) and the mass terms (conspicuously absent from the Lagrangian before symmetry breaking)\nwhere the sum runs over all the fermions of the theory (quarks and leptons), and the fields formula_29 formula_30 formula_31 and formula_32 are given as\nwith formula_34 to be replaced by the relevant field (formula_35 formula_36 formula_37) and by the structure constants of the appropriate gauge group.\nThe neutral current formula_38 and charged current formula_39 components of the Lagrangian contain the interactions between the fermions and gauge bosons,\nwhere formula_41 The electromagnetic current formula_42 is\nwhere formula_44 is the fermions' electric charges. \nThe neutral weak current formula_45 is\nwhere formula_47 is the fermions' weak isospin.\nThe charged current part of the Lagrangian is given by\nwhere formula_49 is the right-handed singlet neutrino field, and the CKM matrix formula_50 determines the mixing between mass and weak eigenstates of the quarks.\nformula_51 contains the Higgs three-point and four-point self interaction terms,\nformula_53 contains the Higgs interactions with gauge vector bosons,\nformula_55 contains the gauge three-point self interactions,\nformula_57 contains the gauge four-point self interactions,\nformula_59 contains the Yukawa interactions between the fermions and the Higgs field,"}
{"id": "10104", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10104", "title": "Elara", "text": "Elara may refer to:"}
{"id": "10105", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10105", "title": "Erasmus Reinhold", "text": "Erasmus Reinhold (22 October 1511 \u2013 19 February 1553) was a German astronomer and mathematician, considered to be the most influential astronomical pedagogue of his generation. He was born and died in Saalfeld, Saxony.\nHe was educated, under Jacob Milich, at the University of Wittenberg, where he was first elected dean and later became rector. In 1536 he was appointed professor of higher mathematics by Philipp Melanchthon. In contrast to the limited modern definition, \"mathematics\" at the time also included applied mathematics, especially astronomy. His colleague, Georg Joachim Rheticus, also studied at Wittenberg and was appointed professor of lower mathematics in 1536.\nReinhold catalogued a large number of stars. His publications on astronomy include a commentary (1542, 1553) on Georg Purbach's \"Theoricae novae planetarum\". Reinhold knew about Copernicus and his heliocentric ideas prior to the publication of his \"De revolutionibus\", and made a favourable reference to him in his commentary on Purbach. However, Reinhold (like other astronomers before Kepler and Galileo) translated Copernicus' mathematical methods back into a geocentric system, rejecting heliocentric cosmology on physical and theological grounds.\nDuke Albert of Brandenburg Prussia supported Reinhold and financed the printing of Reinhold's \"Prutenicae Tabulae\" (1551, 1562, 1571, and 1585) or \"Prussian Tables\". These astronomical tables helped to disseminate calculation methods of Copernicus throughout the Empire, however, Gingerich notes that they showed a \"notable lack of commitment\" to heliocentricity and were \"carefully framed\" to be independent of the movement of the Earth. Both Reinhold's \"Prutenic Tables\" and Copernicus' studies were the foundation for the Calendar Reform by Pope Gregory XIII in 1582.\nIt was Reinhold's heavily annotated copy of \"De revolutionibus\" in the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh, that started Owen Gingerich on his search for copies of the first and second editions which he describes in \"The Book Nobody Read\". In Reinhold's unpublished commentary on \"De revolutionibus\", he calculated the distance from the Earth to the Sun. He \"massaged\" his calculation method in order to arrive at an answer close to that of Ptolemy.\nHis name has been given to a prominent lunar impact crater that lies to the south-southwest of the crater Copernicus, on the Mare Insularum."}
{"id": "10106", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10106", "title": "Earthquake", "text": "An earthquakealso called a quake, tremor, or tembloris the shaking of the Earth's surface resulting from a sudden release of energy in the lithosphere that creates seismic waves. Earthquakes can range in intensity, from those so weak they cannot be felt, to those violent enough to propel objects and people into the air, damage critical infrastructure, and wreak destruction across entire cities. The seismic activity of an area is the frequency, type, and size of earthquakes experienced over a particular time. The seismicity at a particular location in the Earth is the average rate of seismic energy release per unit volume.\nIn its most general sense, the word \"earthquake\" is used to describe any seismic event that generates seismic waves. Earthquakes can occur naturally or be induced by human activities, such as mining, fracking, and nuclear tests. The initial point of rupture is called the hypocenter or focus, while the ground level directly above it is the epicenter. Earthquakes are primarily caused by geological faults, but also by volcanic activity, landslides, and other seismic events. The frequency, type, and size of earthquakes in an area define its seismic activity, reflecting the average rate of seismic energy release.\nSignificant historical earthquakes include the 1556 Shaanxi earthquake in China, with over 830,000 fatalities, and the 1960 Valdivia earthquake in Chile, the largest ever recorded at 9.5 magnitude. Earthquakes result in various effects, such as ground shaking and soil liquefaction, leading to significant damage and loss of life. When the epicenter of a large earthquake is located offshore, the seabed may be displaced sufficiently to cause a tsunami. Earthquakes can trigger landslides. Earthquakes' occurrence is influenced by tectonic movements along faults, including normal, reverse (thrust), and strike-slip faults, with energy release and rupture dynamics governed by the elastic-rebound theory.\nEfforts to manage earthquake risks involve prediction, forecasting, and preparedness, including seismic retrofitting and earthquake engineering to design structures that withstand shaking. The cultural impact of earthquakes spans myths, religious beliefs, and modern media, reflecting their profound influence on human societies. Similar seismic phenomena, known as marsquakes and moonquakes, have been observed on other celestial bodies, indicating the universality of such events beyond Earth.\nTerminology.\nAn earthquake is the shaking of the surface of Earth resulting from a sudden release of energy in the lithosphere that creates seismic waves. Earthquakes may also be referred to as \"quakes\", \"tremors\", or \"temblors\". The word \"tremor\" is also used for non-earthquake seismic rumbling.\nIn its most general sense, an \"earthquake\" is any seismic event\u2014whether natural or caused by humans\u2014that generates seismic waves. Earthquakes are caused mostly by the rupture of geological faults but also by other events such as volcanic activity, landslides, mine blasts, fracking and nuclear tests. An earthquake's point of initial rupture is called its hypocenter or focus. The epicenter is the point at ground level directly above the hypocenter.\nThe \"seismic activity\" of an area is the frequency, type, and size of earthquakes experienced over a particular time. The seismicity at a particular location in the Earth is the average rate of seismic energy release per unit volume.\nMajor examples.\nOne of the most devastating earthquakes in recorded history was the 1556 Shaanxi earthquake, which occurred on 23 January 1556 in Shaanxi, China. More than 830,000 people died. Most houses in the area were yaodongs\u2014dwellings carved out of loess hillsides\u2014and many victims were killed when these structures collapsed. The 1976 Tangshan earthquake, which killed between 240,000 and 655,000 people, was the deadliest of the 20th century.\nThe 1960 Chilean earthquake is the largest earthquake that has been measured on a seismograph, reaching 9.5 magnitude on 22 May 1960. Its epicenter was near Ca\u00f1ete, Chile. The energy released was approximately twice that of the next most powerful earthquake, the Good Friday earthquake (27 March 1964), which was centered in Prince William Sound, Alaska. The ten largest recorded earthquakes have all been megathrust earthquakes; however, of these ten, only the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake is simultaneously one of the deadliest earthquakes in history.\nEarthquakes that caused the greatest loss of life, while powerful, were deadly because of their proximity to either heavily populated areas or the ocean, where earthquakes often create tsunamis that can devastate communities thousands of kilometers away. Regions most at risk for great loss of life include those where earthquakes are relatively rare but powerful, and poor regions with lax, unenforced, or nonexistent seismic building codes.\nOccurrence.\nTectonic earthquakes occur anywhere on the earth where there is sufficient stored elastic strain energy to drive fracture propagation along a fault plane. The sides of a fault move past each other smoothly and aseismically only if there are no irregularities or asperities along the fault surface that increases the frictional resistance. Most fault surfaces do have such asperities, which leads to a form of stick-slip behavior. Once the fault has locked, continued relative motion between the plates leads to increasing stress and, therefore, stored strain energy in the volume around the fault surface. This continues until the stress has risen sufficiently to break through the asperity, suddenly allowing sliding over the locked portion of the fault, releasing the stored energy. This energy is released as a combination of radiated elastic strain seismic waves, frictional heating of the fault surface, and cracking of the rock, thus causing an earthquake. This process of gradual build-up of strain and stress punctuated by occasional sudden earthquake failure is referred to as the elastic-rebound theory. It is estimated that only 10 percent or less of an earthquake's total energy is radiated as seismic energy. Most of the earthquake's energy is used to power the earthquake fracture growth or is converted into heat generated by friction. Therefore, earthquakes lower the Earth's available elastic potential energy and raise its temperature, though these changes are negligible compared to the conductive and convective flow of heat out from the Earth's deep interior.\nFault types.\nThere are three main types of fault, all of which may cause an interplate earthquake: normal, reverse (thrust), and strike-slip. Normal and reverse faulting are examples of dip-slip, where the displacement along the fault is in the direction of dip and where movement on them involves a vertical component. Many earthquakes are caused by movement on faults that have components of both dip-slip and strike-slip; this is known as oblique slip. The topmost, brittle part of the Earth's crust, and the cool slabs of the tectonic plates that are descending into the hot mantle, are the only parts of our planet that can store elastic energy and release it in fault ruptures. Rocks hotter than about flow in response to stress; they do not rupture in earthquakes. The maximum observed lengths of ruptures and mapped faults (which may break in a single rupture) are approximately . Examples are the earthquakes in Alaska (1957), Chile (1960), and Sumatra (2004), all in subduction zones. The longest earthquake ruptures on strike-slip faults, like the San Andreas Fault (1857, 1906), the North Anatolian Fault in Turkey (1939), and the Denali Fault in Alaska (2002), are about half to one third as long as the lengths along subducting plate margins, and those along normal faults are even shorter.\nNormal faults.\nNormal faults occur mainly in areas where the crust is being extended such as a divergent boundary. Earthquakes associated with normal faults are generally less than magnitude 7. Maximum magnitudes along many normal faults are even more limited because many of them are located along spreading centers, as in Iceland, where the thickness of the brittle layer is only about .\nReverse faults.\nReverse faults occur in areas where the crust is being shortened such as at a convergent boundary. Reverse faults, particularly those along convergent boundaries, are associated with the most powerful earthquakes (called megathrust earthquakes) including almost all of those of magnitude 8 or more. Megathrust earthquakes are responsible for about 90% of the total seismic moment released worldwide.\nStrike-slip faults.\nStrike-slip faults are steep structures where the two sides of the fault slip horizontally past each other; transform boundaries are a particular type of strike-slip fault. Strike-slip faults, particularly continental transforms, can produce major earthquakes up to about magnitude 8. Strike-slip faults tend to be oriented near vertically, resulting in an approximate width of within the brittle crust. Thus, earthquakes with magnitudes much larger than 8 are not possible.\nIn addition, there exists a hierarchy of stress levels in the three fault types. Thrust faults are generated by the highest, strike-slip by intermediate, and normal faults by the lowest stress levels. This can easily be understood by considering the direction of the greatest principal stress, the direction of the force that \"pushes\" the rock mass during the faulting. In the case of normal faults, the rock mass is pushed down in a vertical direction, thus the pushing force (\"greatest\" principal stress) equals the weight of the rock mass itself. In the case of thrusting, the rock mass \"escapes\" in the direction of the least principal stress, namely upward, lifting the rock mass, and thus, the overburden equals the \"least\" principal stress. Strike-slip faulting is intermediate between the other two types described above. This difference in stress regime in the three faulting environments can contribute to differences in stress drop during faulting, which contributes to differences in the radiated energy, regardless of fault dimensions.\nEnergy released.\nFor every unit increase in magnitude, there is a roughly thirty-fold increase in the energy released. For instance, an earthquake of magnitude 6.0 releases approximately 32 times more energy than a 5.0 magnitude earthquake and a 7.0 magnitude earthquake releases 1,000 times more energy than a 5.0 magnitude earthquake. An 8.6-magnitude earthquake releases the same amount of energy as 10,000 atomic bombs of the size used in World War II.\nThis is so because the energy released in an earthquake, and thus its magnitude, is proportional to the area of the fault that ruptures and the stress drop. Therefore, the longer the length and the wider the width of the faulted area, the larger the resulting magnitude. The most important parameter controlling the maximum earthquake magnitude on a fault, however, is not the maximum available length, but the available width because the latter varies by a factor of 20. Along converging plate margins, the dip angle of the rupture plane is very shallow, typically about 10 degrees. Thus, the width of the plane within the top brittle crust of the Earth can reach (such as in Japan, 2011, or in Alaska, 1964), making the most powerful earthquakes possible.\nFocus.\nThe majority of tectonic earthquakes originate in the Ring of Fire at depths not exceeding tens of kilometers. Earthquakes occurring at a depth of less than are classified as \"shallow-focus\" earthquakes, while those with a focal depth between are commonly termed \"mid-focus\" or \"intermediate-depth\" earthquakes. In subduction zones, where older and colder oceanic crust descends beneath another tectonic plate, deep-focus earthquakes may occur at much greater depths (ranging from ). These seismically active areas of subduction are known as Wadati\u2013Benioff zones. Deep-focus earthquakes occur at a depth where the subducted lithosphere should no longer be brittle, due to the high temperature and pressure. A possible mechanism for the generation of deep-focus earthquakes is faulting caused by olivine undergoing a phase transition into a spinel structure.\nVolcanic activity.\nEarthquakes often occur in volcanic regions and are caused there, both by tectonic faults and the movement of magma in volcanoes. Such earthquakes can serve as an early warning of volcanic eruptions, as during the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens. Earthquake swarms can serve as markers for the location of the flowing magma throughout the volcanoes. These swarms can be recorded by seismometers and tiltmeters (a device that measures ground slope) and used as sensors to predict imminent or upcoming eruptions.\nRupture dynamics.\nA tectonic earthquake begins as an area of initial slip on the fault surface that forms the focus. Once the rupture has been initiated, it begins to propagate away from the focus, spreading out along the fault surface. Lateral propagation will continue until either the rupture reaches a barrier, such as the end of a fault segment, or a region on the fault where there is insufficient stress to allow continued rupture. For larger earthquakes, the depth extent of rupture will be constrained downwards by the brittle-ductile transition zone and upwards by the ground surface. The mechanics of this process are poorly understood because it is difficult either to recreate such rapid movements in a laboratory or to record seismic waves close to a nucleation zone due to strong ground motion.\nIn most cases, the rupture speed approaches, but does not exceed, the shear wave (S wave) velocity of the surrounding rock. There are a few exceptions to this:\nSupershear earthquakes.\nSupershear earthquake ruptures are known to have propagated at speeds greater than the S wave velocity. These have so far all been observed during large strike-slip events. The unusually wide zone of damage caused by the 2001 Kunlun earthquake has been attributed to the effects of the sonic boom developed in such earthquakes.\nSlow earthquakes.\nSlow earthquake ruptures travel at unusually low velocities. A particularly dangerous form of slow earthquake is the tsunami earthquake, observed where the relatively low felt intensities, caused by the slow propagation speed of some great earthquakes, fail to alert the population of the neighboring coast, as in the 1896 Sanriku earthquake.\nCo-seismic overpressuring and effect of pore pressure.\nDuring an earthquake, high temperatures can develop at the fault plane, increasing pore pressure and consequently vaporization of the groundwater already contained within the rock. In the coseismic phase, such an increase can significantly affect slip evolution and speed, in the post-seismic phase it can control the Aftershock sequence because, after the main event, pore pressure increase slowly propagates into the surrounding fracture network.\nFrom the point of view of the Mohr-Coulomb strength theory, an increase in fluid pressure reduces the normal stress acting on the fault plane that holds it in place, and fluids can exert a lubricating effect. As thermal overpressurization may provide positive feedback between slip and strength fall at the fault plane, a common opinion is that it may enhance the faulting process instability. After the mainshock, the pressure gradient between the fault plane and the neighboring rock causes a fluid flow that increases pore pressure in the surrounding fracture networks; such an increase may trigger new faulting processes by reactivating adjacent faults, giving rise to aftershocks. Analogously, artificial pore pressure increase, by fluid injection in Earth's crust, may induce seismicity.\nTidal forces.\nTides may trigger some seismicity.\nClusters.\nMost earthquakes form part of a sequence, related to each other in terms of location and time. Most earthquake clusters consist of small tremors that cause little to no damage, but there is a theory that earthquakes can recur in a regular pattern. Earthquake clustering has been observed, for example, in Parkfield, California where a long-term research study is being conducted around the Parkfield earthquake cluster.\nAftershocks.\nAn aftershock is an earthquake that occurs after a previous earthquake, the mainshock. Rapid changes of stress between rocks, and the stress from the original earthquake are the main causes of these aftershocks, along with the crust around the ruptured fault plane as it adjusts to the effects of the mainshock. An aftershock is in the same region as the main shock but always of a smaller magnitude, however, they can still be powerful enough to cause even more damage to buildings that were already previously damaged from the mainshock. If an aftershock is larger than the mainshock, the aftershock is redesignated as the mainshock and the original main shock is redesignated as a foreshock. Aftershocks are formed as the crust around the displaced fault plane adjusts to the effects of the mainshock.\nSwarms.\nEarthquake swarms are sequences of earthquakes striking in a specific area within a short period. They are different from earthquakes followed by a series of aftershocks by the fact that no single earthquake in the sequence is the main shock, so none has a notably higher magnitude than another. An example of an earthquake swarm is the 2004 activity at Yellowstone National Park. In August 2012, a swarm of earthquakes shook Southern California's Imperial Valley, showing the most recorded activity in the area since the 1970s.\nSometimes a series of earthquakes occur in what has been called an \"earthquake storm\", where the earthquakes strike a fault in clusters, each triggered by the shaking or stress redistribution of the previous earthquakes. Similar to aftershocks but on adjacent segments of fault, these storms occur over the course of years, with some of the later earthquakes as damaging as the early ones. Such a pattern was observed in the sequence of about a dozen earthquakes that struck the North Anatolian Fault in Turkey in the 20th century and has been inferred for older anomalous clusters of large earthquakes in the Middle East.\nFrequency.\nIt is estimated that around 500,000 earthquakes occur each year, detectable with current instrumentation. About 100,000 of these can be felt. Minor earthquakes occur very frequently around the world in places like California and Alaska in the U.S., as well as in El Salvador, Mexico, Guatemala, Chile, Peru, Indonesia, the Philippines, Iran, Pakistan, the Azores in Portugal, Turkey, New Zealand, Greece, Italy, India, Nepal, and Japan. Larger earthquakes occur less frequently, the relationship being exponential; for example, roughly ten times as many earthquakes larger than magnitude 4 occur than earthquakes larger than magnitude 5. In the (low seismicity) United Kingdom, for example, it has been calculated that the average recurrences are:\nan earthquake of 3.7\u20134.6 every year, an earthquake of 4.7\u20135.5 every 10\u00a0years, and an earthquake of 5.6 or larger every 100\u00a0years. This is an example of the Gutenberg\u2013Richter law.\nThe number of seismic stations has increased from about 350 in 1931 to many thousands today. As a result, many more earthquakes are reported than in the past, but this is because of the vast improvement in instrumentation, rather than an increase in the number of earthquakes. The United States Geological Survey (USGS) estimates that, since 1900, there have been an average of 18 major earthquakes (magnitude 7.0\u20137.9) and one great earthquake (magnitude 8.0 or greater) per year, and that this average has been relatively stable. In recent years, the number of major earthquakes per year has decreased, though this is probably a statistical fluctuation rather than a systematic trend. More detailed statistics on the size and frequency of earthquakes is available from the United States Geological Survey. A recent increase in the number of major earthquakes has been noted, which could be explained by a cyclical pattern of periods of intense tectonic activity, interspersed with longer periods of low intensity. However, accurate recordings of earthquakes only began in the early 1900s, so it is too early to categorically state that this is the case.\nMost of the world's earthquakes (90%, and 81% of the largest) take place in the , horseshoe-shaped zone called the circum-Pacific seismic belt, known as the Pacific Ring of Fire, which for the most part bounds the Pacific plate. Massive earthquakes tend to occur along other plate boundaries too, such as along the Himalayan Mountains.\nWith the rapid growth of mega-cities such as Mexico City, Tokyo, and Tehran in areas of high seismic risk, some seismologists are warning that a single earthquake may claim the lives of up to three million people.\nInduced seismicity.\nWhile most earthquakes are caused by the movement of the Earth's tectonic plates, human activity can also produce earthquakes. Activities both above ground and below may change the stresses and strains on the crust, including building reservoirs, extracting resources such as coal or oil, and injecting fluids underground for waste disposal or fracking. Most of these earthquakes have small magnitudes. The 5.7 magnitude 2011 Oklahoma earthquake is thought to have been caused by disposing wastewater from oil production into injection wells, and studies point to the state's oil industry as the cause of other earthquakes in the past century. A Columbia University paper suggested that the 8.0 magnitude 2008 Sichuan earthquake was induced by loading from the Zipingpu Dam, though the link has not been conclusively proved.\nMeasurement and location.\nThe instrumental scales used to describe the size of an earthquake began with the Richter scale in the 1930s. It is a relatively simple measurement of an event's amplitude, and its use has become minimal in the 21st century. Seismic waves travel through the Earth's interior and can be recorded by seismometers at great distances. The surface-wave magnitude was developed in the 1950s as a means to measure remote earthquakes and to improve the accuracy for larger events. The moment magnitude scale not only measures the amplitude of the shock but also takes into account the seismic moment (total rupture area, average slip of the fault, and rigidity of the rock). The Japan Meteorological Agency seismic intensity scale, the Medvedev\u2013Sponheuer\u2013Karnik scale, and the Mercalli intensity scale are based on the observed effects and are related to the intensity of shaking.\nIntensity and magnitude.\nThe shaking of the earth is a common phenomenon that has been experienced by humans from the earliest of times. Before the development of strong-motion accelerometers, the intensity of a seismic event was estimated based on the observed effects. Magnitude and intensity are not directly related and calculated using different methods. The magnitude of an earthquake is a single value that describes the size of the earthquake at its source. Intensity is the measure of shaking at different locations around the earthquake. Intensity values vary from place to place, depending on the distance from the earthquake and the underlying rock or soil makeup.\nThe first scale for measuring earthquake magnitudes was developed by Charles Francis Richter in 1935. Subsequent scales (seismic magnitude scales) have retained a key feature, where each unit represents a ten-fold difference in the amplitude of the ground shaking and a 32-fold difference in energy. Subsequent scales are also adjusted to have approximately the same numeric value within the limits of the scale.\nAlthough the mass media commonly reports earthquake magnitudes as \"Richter magnitude\" or \"Richter scale\", standard practice by most seismological authorities is to express an earthquake's strength on the moment magnitude scale, which is based on the actual energy released by an earthquake, the static seismic moment.\nSeismic waves.\nEvery earthquake produces different types of seismic waves, which travel through rock with different velocities:\nSpeed of seismic waves.\nPropagation velocity of the seismic waves through solid rock ranges from approx. up to , depending on the density and elasticity of the medium. In the Earth's interior, the shock- or P waves travel much faster than the S waves (approx. relation 1.7:1). The differences in travel time from the epicenter to the observatory are a measure of the distance and can be used to image both sources of earthquakes and structures within the Earth. Also, the depth of the hypocenter can be computed roughly.\nP wave speed\nS waves speed\nSeismic wave arrival.\nAs a consequence, the first waves of a distant earthquake arrive at an observatory via the Earth's mantle.\nOn average, the kilometer distance to the earthquake is the number of seconds between the P- and S wave times 8. Slight deviations are caused by inhomogeneities of subsurface structure. By such analysis of seismograms, the Earth's core was located in 1913 by Beno Gutenberg.\nS waves and later arriving surface waves do most of the damage compared to P waves. P waves squeeze and expand the material in the same direction they are traveling, whereas S waves shake the ground up and down and back and forth.\nLocation and reporting.\nEarthquakes are not only categorized by their magnitude but also by the place where they occur. The world is divided into 754 Flinn\u2013Engdahl regions (F-E regions), which are based on political and geographical boundaries as well as seismic activity. More active zones are divided into smaller F-E regions whereas less active zones belong to larger F-E regions.\nStandard reporting of earthquakes includes its magnitude, date and time of occurrence, geographic coordinates of its epicenter, depth of the epicenter, geographical region, distances to population centers, location uncertainty, several parameters that are included in USGS earthquake reports (number of stations reporting, number of observations, etc.), and a unique event ID.\nAlthough relatively slow seismic waves have traditionally been used to detect earthquakes, scientists realized in 2016 that gravitational measurement could provide instantaneous detection of earthquakes, and confirmed this by analyzing gravitational records associated with the 2011 Tohoku-Oki (\"Fukushima\") earthquake.\nEffects.\nThe effects of earthquakes include, but are not limited to, the following:\nShaking and ground rupture.\nShaking and ground rupture are the main effects created by earthquakes, principally resulting in more or less severe damage to buildings and other rigid structures. The severity of the local effects depends on the complex combination of the earthquake magnitude, the distance from the epicenter, and the local geological and geomorphological conditions, which may amplify or reduce wave propagation. The ground-shaking is measured by ground acceleration.\nSpecific local geological, geomorphological, and geostructural features can induce high levels of shaking on the ground surface even from low-intensity earthquakes. This effect is called site or local amplification. It is principally due to the transfer of the seismic motion from hard deep soils to soft superficial soils and the effects of seismic energy focalization owing to the typical geometrical setting of such deposits.\nGround rupture is a visible breaking and displacement of the Earth's surface along the trace of the fault, which may be of the order of several meters in the case of major earthquakes. Ground rupture is a major risk for large engineering structures such as dams, bridges, and nuclear power stations and requires careful mapping of existing faults to identify any that are likely to break the ground surface within the life of the structure.\nSoil liquefaction.\nSoil liquefaction occurs when, because of the shaking, water-saturated granular material (such as sand) temporarily loses its strength and transforms from a solid to a liquid. Soil liquefaction may cause rigid structures, like buildings and bridges, to tilt or sink into the liquefied deposits. For example, in the 1964 Alaska earthquake, soil liquefaction caused many buildings to sink into the ground, eventually collapsing upon themselves.\nHuman impacts.\nPhysical damage from an earthquake will vary depending on the intensity of shaking in a given area and the type of population. Underserved and developing communities frequently experience more severe impacts (and longer lasting) from a seismic event compared to well-developed communities. Impacts may include:\nWith these impacts and others, the aftermath may bring disease, a lack of basic necessities, mental consequences such as panic attacks and depression to survivors, and higher insurance premiums. Recovery times will vary based on the level of damage and the socioeconomic status of the impacted community.\nLandslides.\nEarthquakes can produce slope instability leading to landslides, a major geological hazard. Landslide danger may persist while emergency personnel is attempting rescue work.\nFires.\nEarthquakes can cause fires by damaging electrical power or gas lines. In the event of water mains rupturing and a loss of pressure, it may also become difficult to stop the spread of a fire once it has started. For example, more deaths in the 1906 San Francisco earthquake were caused by fire than by the earthquake itself.\nTsunami.\nTsunamis are long-wavelength, long-period sea waves produced by the sudden or abrupt movement of large volumes of water\u2014including when an earthquake occurs at sea. In the open ocean, the distance between wave crests can surpass , and the wave periods can vary from five minutes to one hour. Such tsunamis travel 600\u2013800\u00a0kilometers per hour (373\u2013497 miles per hour), depending on water depth. Large waves produced by an earthquake or a submarine landslide can overrun nearby coastal areas in a matter of minutes. Tsunamis can also travel thousands of kilometers across open ocean and wreak destruction on far shores hours after the earthquake that generated them.\nOrdinarily, subduction earthquakes under magnitude 7.5 do not cause tsunamis, although some instances of this have been recorded. Most destructive tsunamis are caused by earthquakes of magnitude 7.5 or more.\nFloods.\nFloods may be secondary effects of earthquakes if dams are damaged. Earthquakes may cause landslips to dam rivers, which collapse and cause floods.\nThe terrain below the Sarez Lake in Tajikistan is in danger of catastrophic flooding if the landslide dam formed by the earthquake, known as the Usoi Dam, were to fail during a future earthquake. Impact projections suggest the flood could affect roughly five million people.\nManagement.\nPrediction.\nEarthquake prediction is a branch of the science of seismology concerned with the specification of the time, location, and magnitude of future earthquakes within stated limits. Many methods have been developed for predicting the time and place in which earthquakes will occur. Despite considerable research efforts by seismologists, scientifically reproducible predictions cannot yet be made to a specific day or month. Popular belief holds earthquakes are preceded by earthquake weather, in the early morning.\nForecasting.\nWhile forecasting is usually considered to be a type of prediction, earthquake forecasting is often differentiated from earthquake prediction. Earthquake forecasting is concerned with the probabilistic assessment of general earthquake hazards, including the frequency and magnitude of damaging earthquakes in a given area over years or decades. For well-understood faults the probability that a segment may rupture during the next few decades can be estimated.\nEarthquake warning systems have been developed that can provide regional notification of an earthquake in progress, but before the ground surface has begun to move, potentially allowing people within the system's range to seek shelter before the earthquake's impact is felt.\nPreparedness.\nThe objective of earthquake engineering is to foresee the impact of earthquakes on buildings, bridges, tunnels, roadways, and other structures, and to design such structures to minimize the risk of damage. Existing structures can be modified by seismic retrofitting to improve their resistance to earthquakes. Earthquake insurance can provide building owners with financial protection against losses resulting from earthquakes. Emergency management strategies can be employed by a government or organization to mitigate risks and prepare for consequences.\nArtificial intelligence may help to assess buildings and plan precautionary operations. The Igor expert system is part of a mobile laboratory that supports the procedures leading to the seismic assessment of masonry buildings and the planning of retrofitting operations on them. It has been applied to assess buildings in Lisbon, Rhodes, and Naples.\nIndividuals can also take preparedness steps like securing water heaters and heavy items that could injure someone, locating shutoffs for utilities, and being educated about what to do when the shaking starts. For areas near large bodies of water, earthquake preparedness encompasses the possibility of a tsunami caused by a large earthquake.\nIn culture.\nHistorical views.\nFrom the lifetime of the Greek philosopher Anaxagoras in the 5th century BCE to the 14th century CE, earthquakes were usually attributed to \"air (vapors) in the cavities of the Earth.\" Thales of Miletus (625\u2013547 BCE) was the only documented person who believed that earthquakes were caused by tension between the earth and water. Other theories existed, including the Greek philosopher Anaxamines' (585\u2013526 BCE) beliefs that short incline episodes of dryness and wetness caused seismic activity. The Greek philosopher Democritus (460\u2013371 BCE) blamed water in general for earthquakes. Pliny the Elder called earthquakes \"underground thunderstorms\".\nMythology and religion.\nIn Norse mythology, earthquakes were explained as the violent struggle of the god Loki. When Loki, god of mischief and strife, murdered Baldr, god of beauty and light, he was punished by being bound in a cave with a poisonous serpent placed above his head dripping venom. Loki's wife Sigyn stood by him with a bowl to catch the poison, but whenever she had to empty the bowl, the poison dripped on Loki's face, forcing him to jerk his head away and thrash against his bonds, which caused the earth to tremble.\nIn Greek mythology, Poseidon was the cause and god of earthquakes. When he was in a bad mood, he struck the ground with a trident, causing earthquakes and other calamities. He also used earthquakes to punish and inflict fear upon people as revenge.\nIn Japanese mythology, Namazu (\u9bf0) is a giant catfish who causes earthquakes. Namazu lives in the mud beneath the earth and is guarded by the god Kashima, who restrains the fish with a stone. When Kashima lets his guard fall, Namazu thrashes about, causing violent earthquakes.\nIn the New Testament, Matthew's Gospel refers to earthquakes occurring both after the death of Jesus (, 54) and at his resurrection (). Earthquakes form part of the picture through which Jesus portrays the beginning of the end of time.\nIn popular culture.\nIn modern popular culture, the portrayal of earthquakes is shaped by the memory of great cities laid waste, such as Kobe in 1995 or San Francisco in 1906. Fictional earthquakes tend to strike suddenly and without warning. For this reason, stories about earthquakes generally begin with the disaster and focus on its immediate aftermath, as in \"Short Walk to Daylight\" (1972), \"The Ragged Edge\" (1968) or \"\" (1999). A notable example is Heinrich von Kleist's classic novella, \"The Earthquake in Chile\", which describes the destruction of Santiago in 1647. Haruki Murakami's short fiction collection \"After the Quake\" depicts the consequences of the Kobe earthquake of 1995.\nThe most popular single earthquake in fiction is the hypothetical \"Big One\" expected of California's San Andreas Fault someday, as depicted in the novels \"Richter 10\" (1996), \"Goodbye California\" (1977), \"2012\" (2009), and \"San Andreas\" (2015), among other works. Jacob M. Appel's widely anthologized short story, \"A Comparative Seismology\", features a con artist who convinces an elderly woman that an apocalyptic earthquake is imminent.\nContemporary depictions of earthquakes in film are variable in the manner in which they reflect human psychological reactions to the actual trauma that can be caused to directly afflicted families and their loved ones. Disaster mental health response research emphasizes the need to be aware of the different roles of loss of family and key community members, loss of home and familiar surroundings, and loss of essential supplies and services to maintain survival. Particularly for children, the clear availability of caregiving adults who can protect, nourish, and clothe them in the aftermath of the earthquake and help them make sense of what has befallen them is more important to their emotional and physical health than the simple giving of provisions. As was observed after other disasters involving destruction and loss of life and their media depictions, recently observed in the 2010 Haiti earthquake, it is also believed to be important not to pathologize the reactions to loss and displacement or disruption of governmental administration and services, but rather to validate the reactions to support constructive problem-solving and reflection.\nOutside of earth.\nPhenomena similar to earthquakes have been observed on other planets (e.g., \"marsquakes\" on Mars) and on the Moon (e.g., \"moonquakes\")."}
{"id": "10109", "revid": "15449111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10109", "title": "Esotericism", "text": "Esotericism may refer to:"}
{"id": "10110", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10110", "title": "Emperor of Japan", "text": "The emperor of Japan is the hereditary monarch and head of state of Japan. The emperor is defined by the Constitution of Japan as the symbol of the Japanese state and the unity of the Japanese people, his position deriving from \"the will of the people with whom resides sovereign power\". The Imperial Household Law governs the line of imperial succession. Pursuant to his constitutional role as a national symbol, and in accordance with rulings by the Supreme Court of Japan, the emperor is personally immune from prosecution. By virtue of his position as the head of the Imperial House, the emperor is also recognized as the head of the Shinto religion, which holds him to be the direct descendant of the sun goddess Amaterasu. According to tradition, the office of emperor was created in the 7th century BC, but the first historically verifiable emperors appear around the 5th or 6th centuries AD.\nThe role of the emperor of Japan has historically alternated between a largely ceremonial symbolic role and that of an actual imperial ruler. Since the establishment of the first shogunate in 1192, the emperors of Japan have rarely taken on a role as supreme battlefield commander, unlike many Western monarchs. Japanese emperors have nearly always been controlled by external political forces, to varying degrees. For example, between 1192 and 1867, the \"sh\u014dguns\", or their \"shikken\" regents in Kamakura (1203\u20131333), were the \"de facto\" rulers of Japan, although they were nominally appointed by the emperor. After the Meiji Restoration in 1868, the emperor was the embodiment of all sovereign power in the realm, as enshrined in the Meiji Constitution of 1889. Since the enactment of the 1947 constitution, the role of emperor has been relegated to that of a ceremonial head of state without even nominal political powers. For example, the emperor is the head of the Japanese honors system, conferring orders, decorations, medals, and awards in the name of the state and on behalf of its people in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet.\nSince the mid-nineteenth century, the emperor and other members of the imperial family have resided at the Imperial Palace, located on the former site of Edo Castle in the heart of Tokyo, the current capital of Japan. Earlier, emperors resided in Kyoto, the ancient capital, for nearly eleven centuries. The Emperor's Birthday (currently 23 February) is a national holiday.\nNaruhito is the current emperor of Japan. He acceded to the Chrysanthemum Throne upon the abdication of his father, Emperor Akihito, on 1 May 2019. He is the only remaining monarch and head of state in the world who holds the title of Emperor.\nConstitutional role.\nMost constitutional monarchies formally vest executive power in the reigning monarch in their capacity as head of state. In turn, these constitutional monarchs are bound by either convention or statute to exercise their prerogatives on the advice of ministers responsible to the duly elected parliament. Some monarchies codify this principle further by requiring royal acts to be countersigned by a minister in order to take effect, thus passing political and legal accountability from the reigning monarch to the minister tendering advice. By contrast, Japan is one of only two such sovereign states where the monarch is not even the \"nominal\" chief executive; the other is Sweden. Rather, of the Constitution of Japan explicitly vests executive authority in the Cabinet, of which the prime minister is the leader. The emperor is also not the commander-in-chief of the Japan Self-Defense Forces. Instead, the Japan Self-Defense Forces Act of 1954 explicitly vests supreme command and control in the prime minister. Nevertheless, the emperor remains Japan's internationally recognized head of state.\nThe emperor's fundamental role within the machinery of the Japanese constitution is to perform important representational functions as \"\u2026the symbol of the State and of the unity of the People, deriving his position from the will of the people with whom resides sovereign power.\" He is limited to performing \"acts in matters of state\" as delineated by the Constitution, without even nominal powers related to government. Moreover, said acts are only exercised in accordance with the binding advice and consent of the Cabinet, which is collectively responsible to the Diet and thence to the electorate. Nevertheless, the emperor enjoys the following rights in the conduct of state business: (a) the right to be consulted before acting on ministerial advice; (b) the right to encourage a given policy or course of administrative action; and (c) the right to warn the Cabinet against the same. In these respects, the emperor personifies the democratic state, sanctions legitimate authority, ensures the legality of his official acts, and guarantees the execution of the public will. These functions, when considered altogether, serve two purposes: foremost, to uphold the continuity and stability of Japanese democracy; and second, to foster a shared national identity and cultural heritage that transcends party politics. In order to maintain his institutional neutrality as Japan's national symbol, he is barred from making political statements.\nIt is the emperor's preeminent constitutional duty to appoint the prime minister as designated by the Diet and the Chief Justice as designated by the Cabinet. However, the emperor does not have the authority to decline the nominations. The emperor's other responsibilities, laid down in Article 7 of the Constitution, concern the basic functioning of the state. To this end, the emperor, on behalf of the Japanese people:\nRegular ceremonies of the emperor with a constitutional basis are the Imperial Investitures \"(Shinninshiki)\" in the Tokyo Imperial Palace and the Speech from the Throne ceremony in the House of Councillors in the National Diet Building. The latter ceremony opens ordinary and extra sessions of the Diet. Ordinary sessions are opened each January and also after new elections to the House of Representatives. Extra sessions usually convene in the autumn and are opened then.\nCultural role.\nThe \"Tenn\u014d\" is regarded as the foremost Shint\u014d priest in terms of religion. This sacred duty dates back to the Niiname-sai (\u65b0\u5617\u796d, \"tasting of new rice\") imperial harvest festival. In this ritual, the emperor presents newly gathered rice to the gods. The celebration is known as \"Daij\u014dsai\" (\u5927\u5617\u796d, \"Great Tasting\") and takes place in the first year after the emperor's accession to the throne. The historical text \"Nihonshoki\", written in the year 720, has the first mention of this ceremony, whose beginnings are believed to date back even further. The event evolved through time to become the Day of Thanksgiving for Labour, a recognized official holiday today.\nThe office of the emperor is also cultural bearer and steward of tradition and culture. For example, the \"Utakai Hajime\" is the annual poetry reading competition convened by the emperor. The emperor is supported in this function by the empress and other members of the imperial family, who have honorary patronages of many associations and organisations. They travel extensively throughout the year within the country to uphold these roles.\nIn sports, the \"Emperor's Cup\" (\u5929\u7687\u8cdc\u676f, \"Tenn\u014d shihai\") is given to a number of competitions such as football, judo, volleyball, and the top division \"y\u016bsh\u014d\" winner of a sumo tournament.\nHistory.\nAlthough the emperor has been a symbol of continuity with the past, the degree of power exercised by the emperor has varied considerably throughout Japanese history.\nOrigins.\nAccording to the traditional account of the Nihon Shoki, Japan was founded by Emperor Jimmu years ago. However most modern scholars agree to regard Jimmu and the nine first emperors as mythical. Emperor Sujin, the 10th emperor, may have been a real historical figure. The emperors from Emperor \u014cjin are considered as perhaps factual. As one argument, the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u2013571 AD), the 29th emperor, is the first for whom contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates.\nArchaeological information about the earliest historical rulers of Japan may be contained in the ancient tombs known as \"kofun\", constructed between the early 3rd century and the early 7th century AD. However, since the Meiji period, the Imperial Household Agency has refused to open the \"kofun\" to the public or to archaeologists, citing their desire not to disturb the spirits of the past emperors. \"Kofun\" period artefacts were also increasingly crucial in Japan as the Meiji government used them to reinforce their authority. In 2016, the Imperial Household Agency reversed its position and decided to allow researchers to enter some of the \"kofun\" with limited time and way.\nIn the early 7th century, the emperor had begun to be called the . The title of emperor was borrowed from China, being derived from Chinese characters, and was retroactively applied to the legendary Japanese rulers who reigned before the 7th\u20138th centuries AD.\nDisputes and instability (10th century).\nThe growth of the samurai class from the 10th century gradually weakened the power of the imperial family over the realm, leading to a time of instability. Emperors are known to have come into conflict with the reigning shogun from time to time. Some instances, such as Emperor Go-Toba's 1221 rebellion against the Kamakura shogunate and the 1336 Kenmu Restoration under Emperor Go-Daigo, show the power struggle between the Imperial Court in Kyoto and the military governments of Japan.\nFactional control (530s\u20131867) and \"sh\u014dguns\" (1192\u20131867).\nThere have been seven non-imperial families who have controlled Japanese emperors: the Soga (530s\u2013645), the Fujiwara (850s\u20131070), the Taira (1159\u20131180s), the Minamoto (1192\u20131199), the H\u014dj\u014d (1199\u20131333), the Ashikaga (1336\u20131565), and the Tokugawa (1603\u20131867). However, every shogun from the Minamoto, Ashikaga, and Tokugawa families had to be officially recognized by the emperors, who were still the source of sovereignty, although they could not exercise their powers independently from the shogunate.\nDuring the major part of 1192 to 1867, political sovereignty of the state was exercised by the \"sh\u014dguns\" or their \"shikken\" regents (1203\u20131333), whose authority was conferred by Imperial warrant. When Portuguese explorers first came into contact with the Japanese (see \"Nanban period\"), they described Japanese conditions in analogy, likening the emperor with great symbolic authority, but little political power, to the pope, and the \"sh\u014dgun\" to secular European rulers (e.g., the Holy Roman emperor). In keeping with the analogy, they even used the term \"emperor\" in reference to the \"sh\u014dguns\" and their regents, e.g. in the case of Toyotomi Hideyoshi, whom missionaries called \"Emperor Taico-sama\" (from Taik\u014d and the honorific \"sama\"). A Dutch embassy report used similar terminology in 1691. Empress Go-Sakuramachi was the last ruling empress of Japan and reigned from 1762 to 1771. During the Sakoku period of 1603 to 1868, there was very limited trade between Japan and foreigners. The Dutch were the only westerners who had limited access to Japan.\nKenmu Restoration (1333\u20131336).\nEmperor Go-Daigo succeeded in 1333 to get back the direct authority directly to the emperor after overthrowing the Kamakura shogunate, with the help of Ashikaga Takauji, a defected Kamakura general. The short three-year period during which the power was directly in the hand of the emperor is called the Kenmu Restoration. The direct ruling of the emperor proved however inefficient and ultimately failed, with Takauji grabbing political power for himself.\nMeiji Restoration (1868).\nIn July 1853, Commodore Perry's Black Ships of the US Navy made their first visit to Edo Bay. Japan lacked the military and industrial power to prevent it. Unequal treaties coerced and took advantage of Japan. Consequently, Japan was forcibly opened to foreign trade and the shogunate proved incapable of hindering the \"barbarian\" interlopers; Emperor K\u014dmei thus began to assert himself politically. By the early 1860s, the relationship between the Imperial Court and the shogunate was changing radically. Disaffected domains and \"r\u014dnin\" began to rally to the call of \"sonn\u014d j\u014di\" (\"revere the emperor, expel the barbarians\"). The domains of Satsuma and Ch\u014dsh\u016b, historic enemies of the Tokugawa, used this turmoil to unite their forces and won an important military victory outside of Kyoto against Tokugawa forces.\nOn 9 November 1867, the Shogun Tokugawa Yoshinobu formally stepped down to restore Emperor Meiji to nominal full power. He issued the imperial decree of constitutionalism on 14 April 1875. The Meiji Constitution was adopted on 11 February 1889. The emperor of Japan became an active ruler with considerable political power over foreign policy and diplomacy which was shared with an elected Imperial Diet. The Japanese subjects gained many rights and duties.\nThe constitution described the emperor (in Article 4) as: \"the head of the Empire, combining in Himself the rights of sovereignty\", and he \"exercises them, according to the provisions of the present Constitution\". His rights included to sanction and promulgate laws, to execute them and to exercise \"supreme command of the Army and the Navy\". The liaison conference created in 1893 also made the emperor the leader of the Imperial General Headquarters. On Meiji's death in 1912 and the accession of his son Taish\u014d, who suffered from ill-health and various disabilities, many of these powers were assumed by the Imperial Diet in an era known as the Taish\u014d Democracy.\nWorld War II (1937\u20131945).\nEmperor Sh\u014dwa (Hirohito) was in power during the Pacific War; he controlled both the sovereign of the state and the imperial forces. The role of the emperor as head of the State Shinto religion was exploited during the war, creating an Imperial cult that led to kamikaze bombers and other manifestations of fanaticism. This in turn led to the requirement in the Potsdam Declaration for the elimination \"for all time of the authority and influence of those who have deceived and misled the people of Japan into embarking on world conquest\".\nIn State Shinto, the emperor was believed to be an (manifest kami or incarnation of a deity). Following Japan's surrender, the Allies issued the Shinto Directive separating church and state within Japan. In 1946, Emperor Sh\u014dwa was forced to proclaim the Humanity Declaration, but the declaration excludes the word , including the unusual word instead. As such, some experts doubt whether his divinity was renounced. Jean Herbert said it would be inadmissible to deny his divine origin.\nEmperor Sh\u014dwa was excluded from the postwar Tokyo War Crimes Tribunal. Scholars dispute the power he had and the role he played during WWII. Emperor Sh\u014dwa's reign from 1926 until his death in 1989 makes him the longest-lived and longest-reigning historical Japanese emperor, and one of the longest-reigning monarchs in the world.\nContemporary (1978\u2013present).\nThe Emperors of Japan have not visited Yasukuni Shrine since 1978. Hirohito maintained an official boycott of Yasukuni Shrine after it was revealed to him that Class-A war criminals had secretly been enshrined. The boycott was continued by his son and grandson, Akihito and Naruhito.\nBy 1979, Emperor Sh\u014dwa was the only monarch in the world with the monarchical title \"emperor.\" Emperor Sh\u014dwa was the longest-reigning historical monarch in Japan's history and the world's longest reigning contemporary monarch until he was surpassed by King Bhumibol Adulyadej of Thailand in July 2008.\nAccording to journalist Makoto Inoue of \"The Nikkei\", Emperor Emeritus Akihito wanted to be closer to the people, rather than be treated like a god or robot. Inoue believes that during his reign, he transformed the symbolic role of emperor into a human being. In March 2019, the Mainichi reported 87% thought Akihito fulfilled his role as symbol of the state.\nOn 30 April 2019, Emperor Akihito abdicated due to health issues and the Heisei era ended. The previous time abdication occurred was Emperor K\u014dkaku in 1817. Akihito's eldest son, Naruhito ascended on 1 May 2019, referred to as \"Kinj\u014d Tenn\u014d\" and Reiwa era started.\nCurrent constitution.\nIn 1947 the post-war became law when it received the emperor's assent on 3 November 1946. It provides for a parliamentary system of government and guarantees certain fundamental rights. Under its terms, the emperor of Japan is \"the symbol of the State and of the unity of the people\" and exercises a purely ceremonial role without the possession of sovereignty. It was drawn up under the Allied occupation that followed World War II and changed Japan's previous Prussian-style Meiji Constitution that granted the emperor theoretically unlimited powers. The liberal constitution was inspired by several European states. Currently, it is a rigid document and the oldest unamended constitution.\nRealm and territories.\nHistorically, territorial designations are not a requirement for the position of \"Tenn\u014d\" (emperor). Rather it is the emperor's symbolic and religious power of authority. Since the Kamakura shogunate, the emperor held de jure ownership of the realm. Throughout most of medieval Japan, the shogun's legitimate authority was based on being appointed and receiving the power from the emperor even though the shogun was the \"de facto\" ruler. The emperor was considered a direct descendant of Amaterasu and of utmost importance in the Shinto religion and sentimental traditions. Thus no shogun tried to usurp the emperor, instead they tried to keep the emperor under control and away from politics. However, the emperor still had the power to \"control time\" via the Japanese Neng\u014d which names eras on calendars after emperors.\nDuring the Kofun period the first central government of the unified state was Yamato in the Kinai region of central Japan. The territory of Japan has changed throughout history. Its largest extent was the Empire of Japan. In 1938 it was .\nThe maximum extent including the home islands and the Japanese colonial empire was in 1942. After its defeat in World War II the empire was dismantled. The contemporary territories include the Japanese archipelago and these areas. Regardless of territorial changes the emperor remains the formal head of state of Japan. During most of history, \"de facto\" power was with shoguns or prime ministers. The emperor was more like a revered embodiment of divine harmony than the head of an actual governing administration. In Japan, it was more effective for ambitious daimyo (feudal lords) to hold actual power, as such positions were not inherently contradictory to the emperor's position. The shoguns and prime ministers derived their legitimacy from the emperor. The parliamentary government continues a similar coexistence with the emperor.\nThe first recorded instance of the name \"Nihon\" was between 665 and 703 during the Asuka period. This was several centuries after the start of the current imperial line. The various names of Japan do not affect the status of the emperor as head of state.\nEducation.\nThe emperors traditionally had an education officer. In recent times, Emperor Taish\u014d had Count Nogi Maresuke, Emperor Sh\u014dwa had Marshal-Admiral Marquis T\u014dg\u014d Heihachir\u014d, and Emperor Akihito had Elizabeth Gray Vining as well as as their tutors. Members of the Imperial family were obliged to be educated at the Gakush\u016bin (Peer's School) by the 1926 Act of Education for the Imperial family, which was abolished in 1947.\nReference and naming.\nThe Japanese language has two words equivalent to the English word \"emperor\": , which refers exclusively to the emperor of Japan, and , which primarily identifies non-Japanese emperors. \"Sumeramikoto\" (\"the imperial person\") was also used in Old Japanese.\nThe title given posthumously to an emperor changed after the death of Emperor Murakami in 967, who was the last to receive the title . From the death of Emperor En'y\u016b in 991 onward, the title started to be used instead of \"tenn\u014d\" as the honorary title attached to the . The term \"in\" originally referred to both the residence and the honorific title of a . However, from the Heian period onward, as it became rare for emperors to pass away before abdicating, the \"in\" title became established as a posthumous title. An exception is Emperor Antoku, who died during his reign in 1187, and was posthumously given a title that included \"tenn\u014d\". Although \"tenn\u014d\" was not used for emperors from the 10th or 12th century to the 19th century, it continued to be used for emperors who died before Juntoku abdicated due to the 1221 J\u014dky\u016b Rebellion.\nDuring their reign, the term \"tenn\u014d\" was only written in documents on limited occasions, such as when it was written as \"tenn\u014d\" but read as \"sumeramikoto\" in the . Normally, out of respect, euphemistic expressions like , , or , which refer to the emperor's palace or supreme status, were used instead.\nHowever, as the use of the title \"in\", which originally referred to retired emperors, gradually expanded over time to include members of the imperial family, shoguns, daimyos, and even commoners, it came to be seen as inappropriate for deceased emperors. The Edo period Confucian scholar Nakai Chikuzan (1730\u20131804) remarked, \"The title \"in\" is used by everyone from feudal lords and nobles to samurai and commoners, so it lacks the supreme honor of the imperial title and is unworthy\" (from \"S\u014db\u014d Kigen\"). He argued that deceased emperors should be referred to as \"Era Name + Tenn\u014d.\"\nAmid this trend, when Emperor K\u014dkaku died in 1840, Emperor Nink\u014d consulted with the court nobles about reviving the title \"tenn\u014d\" and obtained permission from the Tokugawa shogunate. He then selected a posthumous name, and in 1841, bestowed the title and posthumous name . From this point onward, the title \"tenn\u014d\" was once again used for deceased emperors.\nOther titles that were recorded to be in use were \"k\u014d\" (\u7687), \"tei\" (\u5e1d), \"\u014d\" (\u738b), all meaning \"prince\" or \"emperor\", and \"tenshi\" (\u5929\u5b50), or \"son of heaven\".\nIn English, the term \"mikado\" ( or ), literally meaning \"the honorable gate\" (i.e. the gate of the imperial palace, which indicates the person who lives in and possesses the palace; compare \"Sublime Porte\", an old term for the Ottoman government), was once used (as in \"The Mikado\", a 19th-century operetta), but this term is now obsolete.\nJapanese emperors take on a regnal name, which is the common and polite way to refer to the emperor as a person during their reign. Japanese regnal names are more precisely names for a period of time that begins with a historical event, such as the enthronement of an emperor. Since Emperor Meiji, it has been customary to have one era per emperor and to rename each emperor after his death using the name of the era over which he presided. Before Emperor Meiji, the names of the eras were changed more frequently, and the posthumous names of the emperors were chosen differently.\nHirohito was never referred to by his name in Japan. He was given the posthumous name \"Sh\u014dwa Tenn\u014d\" after his death, which is the only name that Japanese speakers currently use when referring to him.\nThe current emperor on the throne is typically referred to as \"Tenn\u014d Heika\" (, \"His [Imperial] Majesty the Emperor\"), \"Kinj\u014d Heika\" (, \"His Current Majesty\") or simply \"Tenn\u014d\", when speaking Japanese. Emperor Akihito received the title \"Daij\u014d Tenn\u014d\" (, Emperor Emeritus), often shortened to \"J\u014dk\u014d\" (), upon his abdication on 30 April 2019, and is expected to be renamed \"Heisei Tenn\u014d\" () after his death and will then be referred to exclusively by that name in Japanese.\nOrigin of the title.\nOriginally, the ruler of Japan was known as either / (\"Yamato-\u014dkimi\", \"Grand King of Yamato\"), / (\"Wa-\u014d\"/\"Wakoku-\u014d\", \"King of Wa\", used externally) or (\"Ame-no-shita shiroshimesu \u014dkimi\" or \"Sumera no mikoto\", \"Grand King who rules all under heaven\", used internally) in Japanese and Chinese sources before the 7th century. The oldest diplomatic reference to the title (\"Tenshi\", Emperor or Son of Heaven) can be found in a diplomatic document sent from Empress Suiko to the Sui dynasty of China in 607. In this document, Empress Suiko introduced herself to Emperor Yang of Sui as \u65e5\u51fa\u8655\u5929\u5b50 (\"Hi izurutokoro no tenshi\") meaning \"Heavenly son of the land where the sun rises\". The oldest documented use of the title (\"Tenn\u014d\", heavenly emperor) appears on a wooden tablet, or \"mokkan\", that was unearthed in Asuka-mura, Nara Prefecture in 1998 and dated back to the reign of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d in the 7th century.\nMarriage traditions.\nThroughout history, Japanese emperors and noblemen appointed a spouse to the position of chief wife, rather than just keeping a harem or an assortment of female attendants.\nThe Japanese imperial dynasty consistently practiced official polygamy until the Taish\u014d period (1912\u20131926). Besides his empress, the emperor could take, and nearly always took, several secondary consorts (\"concubines\") of various hierarchical degrees. Concubines were allowed also to other dynasts (Shinn\u014dke, \u014cke). After a decree by Emperor Ichij\u014d (), some emperors even had two empresses simultaneously (identified by the separate titles \"k\u014dg\u014d\" and \"ch\u016bg\u016b\"). With the help of all this polygamy, the imperial clan could produce more offspring. (Sons by secondary consorts were usually recognized as imperial princes, too, and such a son could be recognized as heir to the throne if the empress did not give birth to an heir.)\nOf the eight reigning empresses of Japan, none married or gave birth after ascending the throne. Some of them, being widows, had produced children before their reigns. In the succession, children of the empress were preferred over sons of secondary consorts. Thus it was significant which quarters had preferential opportunities in providing chief wives to imperial princes, i.e. supplying future empresses.\nApparently, the oldest tradition of official marriages within the imperial dynasty involved marriages between dynasty members, even between half-siblings or between uncle and niece. Such marriages were deemed to preserve better the imperial blood; or they aimed at producing children symbolic of a reconciliation between two branches of the imperial dynasty. Daughters of other families remained concubines until Emperor Sh\u014dmu (701\u2013706)in what was specifically reported as the first elevation of its kindelevated his Fujiwara consort Empress K\u014dmy\u014d to chief wife.\nJapanese monarchs have been, as much as others elsewhere, dependent on making alliances with powerful chiefs and with other monarchs. Many such alliances were sealed by marriages. However, in Japan such marriages soon became incorporated as elements of tradition which controlled the marriages of later generations, though the original practical alliance had lost its real meaning. A repeated pattern saw an imperial son-in-law under the influence of his powerful non-imperial father-in-law.\nBeginning from the 7th and 8th centuries, emperors primarily took women of the Fujiwara clan as their highest-ranking wives \u2013 the most probable mothers of future monarchs. This was cloaked as a tradition of marriage between heirs of two \"kami\" (Shinto deities): descendants of Amaterasu with descendants of the family \"kami\" of the Fujiwara. (Originally, the Fujiwara descended from relatively minor nobility, thus their \"kami\" is an unremarkable one in the Japanese myth world.) To produce imperial children, heirs of the nation, with two-side descent from the two kami, was regarded as desirable \u2013 or at least it suited powerful Fujiwara lords, who thus received preference in the imperial marriage-market. The reality behind such marriages was an alliance between an imperial prince and a Fujiwara lord (his father-in-law or grandfather), the latter with his resources supporting the prince to the throne and most often controlling the government. These arrangements established the tradition of regents (Sessh\u014d and Kampaku), with these positions held only by a Fujiwara sekke lord.\nEarlier, the emperors had married women from families of the government-holding Soga lords, and women of the imperial clan, i.e. various-degree cousins and often even their own half-sisters. Several imperial figures of the 5th and 6th centuries such as Prince Sh\u014dtoku (574\u2013622) were children of half-sibling couples. Such marriages often served as alliance or succession devices: the Soga lord ensured his domination of a prince who would be put on the throne as a puppet; or a prince ensured the combination of two imperial descents, to strengthen his own and his children's claim to the throne. Marriages were also a means to seal a reconciliation between two imperial branches.\nAfter a couple of centuries, emperors could no longer take anyone from outside such families as a primary wife, no matter what the potential expediency of such a marriage and the power or wealth offered by such a match. Only very rarely did a prince ascend the throne whose mother was not descended from the approved families. The earlier necessity and expediency had mutated into a strict tradition that did not allow for current expediency or necessity, but only prescribed the daughters of a restricted circle of families as eligible brides, because they had produced eligible brides for centuries. Tradition had become more forceful than law.\nFujiwara women often became empresses, while concubines came from less exalted noble families. In the last thousand years, sons of an imperial male and a Fujiwara woman have been preferred in the succession. The five Fujiwara families, Ichij\u014d, Kuj\u014d, Nij\u014d, Konoe, and Takatsukasa, functioned as the primary source of imperial brides from the 8th century to the 19th century, even more often than daughters of the imperial clan itself. Fujiwara daughters were thus the usual empresses and mothers of emperors. The Meiji-era Imperial House Law of 1889 made this restriction on brides for the emperor and crown prince explicit. A clause stipulated that daughters of Sekke (the five main branches of the higher Fujiwara) and daughters of the imperial clan itself were primarily acceptable brides. The law was repealed in the aftermath of World War II. In 1959 the future Emperor Akihito became the first crown-prince for over a thousand years to marry a consort from outside the previously eligible circle.\nThree Sacred Treasures.\nIn Japanese mythology, the sacred treasures were bestowed on Ninigi-no-Mikoto, the grandson of the goddess Amaterasu, at the advent of Tenson k\u014drin. Amaterasu sent him to pacify Japan by bringing the three celestial gifts that are used by the emperor. The account of Ninigi being sent to earth appears in the . The Three Sacred Treasures were inherited by successive Japanese emperors, which are the same as or similar to the sacred treasures in mythology. These three gifts signify that the emperor is the descendant of Amaterasu. The three sacred treasures are:\nDuring the succession rite (senso, \u8df5\u795a), possessing the jewel Yasakani no Magatama, the sword Kusanagi and the mirror Yata no Kagami are a testament of the legitimate serving emperor.\nSuccession.\nThe origins of the Japanese imperial dynasty are obscure, and it bases its position on the claim that it has \"reigned since time immemorial\". There are no records of any emperor who was not said to have been a descendant of other, yet there is suspicion that Emperor Keitai (c. AD 500) may have been an unrelated outsider, though the sources (Kojiki, Nihon-Shoki) state that he was a male-line descendant of Emperor \u014cjin. However, his descendants, including his successors, were according to records descended from at least one and probably several imperial princesses of the older lineage.\nMillennia ago, the Japanese imperial family developed its own peculiar system of hereditary succession. It has been non-primogenitural, more or less agnatic, based mostly on rotation. Today, Japan uses strict agnatic primogeniture, which was adopted from Prussia, by which Japan was greatly influenced in the 1870s.\nThe controlling principles and their interaction were apparently very complex and sophisticated, leading to even idiosyncratic outcomes. Some chief principles apparent in the succession have been:\nHistorically, the succession to the Chrysanthemum Throne has always passed to descendants in male line from the imperial lineage. Generally, they have been males, though over the reign of one hundred monarchs there have been nine women (one pre-historical and eight historical) as emperor on eleven occasions.\nOver a thousand years ago, a tradition started that an emperor should ascend relatively young. A dynast who had passed his toddler years was regarded suitable and old enough. Reaching the age of legal majority was not a requirement. Thus, a multitude of Japanese emperors have ascended as children, as young as 6 or 8 years old. The high-priestly duties were deemed possible for a walking child. A reign of around 10 years was regarded a sufficient service. Being a child was apparently a fine property, to better endure tedious duties and to tolerate subjugation to political power-brokers, as well as sometimes to cloak the truly powerful members of the imperial dynasty. Almost all Japanese empresses and dozens of emperors abdicated and lived the rest of their lives in pampered retirement, wielding influence behind the scenes. Several emperors abdicated to their entitled retirement while still in their teens. These traditions show in Japanese folklore, theater, literature, and other forms of culture, where the emperor is usually described or depicted as an adolescent.\nBefore the Meiji Restoration, Japan had eleven reigns of reigning empresses, all of them daughters of the male line of the Imperial House. None ascended purely as a wife or as a widow of an emperor. Imperial daughters and granddaughters, however, usually ascended the throne as a sort of a \"stop gap\" measure \u2013 if a suitable male was not available or some imperial branches were in rivalry so that a compromise was needed. Over half of Japanese empresses and many emperors abdicated once a suitable male descendant was considered to be old enough to rule (just past toddlerhood, in some cases). Four empresses, Empress Suiko, Empress K\u014dgyoku (also Empress Saimei), and Empress Jit\u014d, as well as the legendary Empress Jing\u016b, were widows of deceased emperors and princesses of the blood imperial in their own right. One, Empress Genmei, was the widow of a crown prince and a princess of the blood imperial. The other four, Empress Gensh\u014d, Empress K\u014dken (also Empress Sh\u014dtoku), Empress Meish\u014d, and Empress Go-Sakuramachi, were unwed daughters of previous emperors. None of these empresses married or gave birth after ascending the throne.\nArticle 2 of the Meiji Constitution (the Constitution of the Empire of Japan) stated, \"The Imperial Throne shall be succeeded to by imperial male descendants, according to the provisions of the Imperial House Law.\" The 1889 Imperial Household Law fixed the succession on male descendants of the imperial line, and specifically excluded female descendants from the succession. In the event of a complete failure of the main line, the throne would pass to the nearest collateral branch, again in the male line. If the empress did not give birth to an heir, the emperor could take a concubine, and the son he had by that concubine would be recognized as heir to the throne. This law, which was promulgated on the same day as the Meiji Constitution, enjoyed co-equal status with that constitution.\nArticle 2 of the Constitution of Japan, promulgated in 1947 by influence of the U.S. occupation administration, provides that \"The Imperial Throne shall be dynastic and succeeded to in accordance with the Imperial Household Law passed by the Diet.\" The Imperial Household Law of 1947, enacted by the ninety-second and last session of the Imperial Diet, retained the exclusion on female dynasts found in the 1889 law. The government of Prime Minister Yoshida Shigeru hastily cobbled together the legislation to bring the Imperial Household in compliance with the American-written Constitution of Japan that went into effect in May 1947. In an effort to control the size of the imperial family, the law stipulates that only legitimate male descendants in the male line can be dynasts, that imperial princesses lose their status as imperial family members if they marry outside the imperial family, and that the emperor and other members of the Imperial Family may not adopt children. It also prevented branches, other than the branch descending from Taish\u014d, from being imperial princes any longer.\nCurrent status.\nSuccession is now regulated by laws passed by the National Diet. The current law excludes women from the succession. A change to this law had been considered until Princess Kiko gave birth to Prince Hisahito.\nUntil the birth of Hisahito, son of Prince Akishino, on 6 September 2006, there was a potential succession problem, since Prince Akishino was the only male child to be born into the imperial family since 1965. Following the birth of Princess Aiko on 1 December 2001, there was public debate about amending the current Imperial Household Law to allow women to succeed to the throne. In January 2005, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi appointed a special panel composed of judges, university professors, and civil servants to study changes to the Imperial Household Law and to make recommendations to the government.\nThe panel dealing with the succession issue recommended on 25 October 2005, amending the law to allow females of the male line of imperial descent to ascend the Japanese throne. On January 20, 2006, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi devoted part of his annual keynote speech to the controversy, pledging to submit a bill allowing women to ascend the throne to ensure that the succession continues in the future in a stable manner. Shortly after the announcement that Princess Kiko was pregnant with her third child, Koizumi suspended such plans. Her son, Prince Hisahito, is the third in line to the throne under the current law of succession. On January 3, 2007, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe announced that he would drop the proposal to alter the Imperial Household Law.\nAnother proposed plan is to allow unmarried men from the abolished collateral branches of the imperial family to rejoin through adoption or marriage. This would be an emergency measure to ensure stable succession. It does not revise the Imperial Household Law. This does not restore the royalty of the 11 collateral branches of the Imperial House that were abolished in October 1947.\nCrown Prince Akishino was formally declared first in line to the chrysanthemum throne on November 8, 2020.\nBurial traditions.\nDuring the Kofun period, so-called \"archaic funerals\" were held for the dead emperors, but only the funerary rites from the end of the period, which the chronicles describe in more detail, are known. They were centered around the rite of the \"mogari\" (), a provisional depository between death and permanent burial.\nEmpress Jit\u014d was the first Japanese imperial personage to be cremated (in 703). After that, with a few exceptions, all emperors were cremated up to the Edo period. For the next 350 years, in-ground burial became the favoured funeral custom. Until 1912, the emperors were usually buried in Kyoto. From Emperor Taish\u014d onward, the emperors have been buried at the Musashi Imperial Graveyard in Tokyo.\nIn 2013, the Imperial Household Agency announced that Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko would be cremated after they die.\nWealth.\nUntil the end of World War II, the Japanese monarchy was thought to be among the wealthiest in the world. Before 1911, no distinction was made between the imperial crown estates and the emperor's personal properties, which were considerable. The Imperial Property Law, which came into effect in January 1911, established two categories of imperial properties: the hereditary or crown estates and the personal (\"ordinary\") properties of the imperial family. The Imperial Household Minister was given the responsibility for observing any judicial proceedings concerning imperial holdings. Under the terms of the law, imperial properties were only taxable in cases where no conflict with the Imperial House Law existed; however, crown estates could only be used for public or imperially-sanctioned undertakings. Personal properties of certain members of the imperial family, in addition to properties held for imperial family members who were minors, were exempted from taxation. Those family members included the Empress Dowager, the Empress, the Crown Prince and Crown Princess, the Imperial Grandson and the consort of the Imperial Grandson. As a result of the poor economic conditions in Japan, of crown lands (about 26% of the total landholdings) were either sold or transferred to government and private-sector interests in 1921. In 1930, the Nagoya Detached Palace (Nagoya Castle) was donated to the city of Nagoya, with six other imperial villas being either sold or donated at the same time. In 1939, Nij\u014d Castle, the former Kyoto residence of the Tokugawa shoguns and an imperial palace since the Meiji Restoration, was likewise donated to the city of Kyoto.\nAt the end of 1935, according to official government figures, the Imperial Court owned roughly of landed estates, the bulk of which () were the emperor's private lands, with the total acreage of the crown estates amounting to some ; those landholdings comprised palace complexes, forest and farm lands and other residential and commercial properties. The total value of the imperial properties was then estimated at \u00a5650\u00a0million, or roughly US$195\u00a0million at prevailing exchange rates. This was in addition to the emperor's personal fortune, which amounted to hundreds of millions of yen and included numerous family heirlooms and furnishings, purebred livestock and investments in major Japanese firms, such as the Bank of Japan, other major Japanese banks, the Imperial Hotel and Nippon Yusen.\nFollowing Japan's defeat in the Second World War, all of the collateral branches of the imperial family were abolished under the Allied occupation of the country and the subsequent constitutional reforms, forcing those families to sell their assets to private or government owners. Staff numbers in the imperial households were slashed from a peak of roughly 6,000 to about 1,000. The imperial estates and the emperor's personal fortune (then estimated at US$17.15\u00a0million, or roughly US$800\u00a0million in 2024 terms) were transferred to either state or private ownership, excepting of landholdings. Since the 1947 constitutional reforms, the imperial family has been supported by an official civil list sanctioned by the Japanese government. The largest imperial divestments were the former imperial Kiso and Amagi forest lands in Gifu and Shizuoka prefectures, grazing lands for livestock in Hokkaido and a stock farm in the Chiba region, all of which were transferred to the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. Imperial property holdings have been further reduced since 1947 after several handovers to the government. Today, the primary imperial properties include the two imperial palaces at Tokyo and Kyoto, several imperial villas and a number of imperial farms and game preserves.\nAs of 2017, Akihito has an estimated net worth of US$40\u00a0million. The wealth and expenditures of the emperor and the imperial family have remained a subject of speculation and were largely withheld from the public until 2003, when Mori Yohei, a former royal correspondent for the \"Mainichi Shimbun\", obtained access to 200 documents through a recently passed public information law. Mori's findings, which he published in a book, revealed details of the imperial family's US$240\u00a0million civil list (in 2003 values). Among other details, the book revealed the imperial family employed a staff of over 1,000 people. The total cost of events related to the enthronement of Emperor Naruhito was approximately 16.6 billion yen ($150 million) in 2019. This is 30% higher than Emperor Emeritus Akihito's accession (1990)."}
{"id": "10111", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10111", "title": "Emperor", "text": "The word emperor (from , via ) can mean the male ruler of an empire. Empress, the female equivalent, may indicate an emperor's wife (empress consort), mother/grandmother (empress dowager/grand empress dowager), or a woman who rules in her own right and name (empress regnant or \"suo jure\"). Emperors are generally recognized to be of the highest monarchic honour and rank, surpassing king. In Europe, the title of Emperor has been used since the Middle Ages, considered in those times equal or almost equal in dignity to that of Pope due to the latter's position as visible head of the Church and spiritual leader of the Catholic part of Western Europe. The emperor of Japan is the only currently reigning monarch whose title is translated into English as \"Emperor\".\nBoth emperors and kings are monarchs or sovereigns, both emperor and empress are considered monarchical titles. In as much as there is a strict definition of emperor, it is that an emperor has no relations implying the superiority of any other ruler and typically rules over more than one nation. Therefore, a king might be obliged to pay tribute to another ruler, or be restrained in his actions in some unequal fashion, but an emperor should in theory be completely free of such restraints. However, monarchs heading empires have not always used the title in all contexts\u2014the British sovereign did not assume the title Empress of the British Empire even during the incorporation of India, though she was declared Empress of India.\nIn Western Europe, the title of Emperor was used exclusively by the Holy Roman Emperor, whose imperial authority was derived from the concept of , i.e., they claimed succession to the authority of the Roman emperors, thus linking themselves to Roman institutions and traditions as part of state ideology. Although initially ruling much of Central Europe and northern Italy, by the 19th century, the emperor exercised little power beyond the German-speaking states.\nAlthough technically an elective title, by the late 16th century, the imperial title had in practice come to be inherited by the Habsburg Archdukes of Austria and, following the Thirty Years' War, their control over the states (outside the Habsburg monarchy, i.e. Austria, Bohemia and various territories outside the empire) had become nearly non-existent. However, Napoleon Bonaparte was crowned Emperor of the French in 1804 and was shortly followed by Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor, who declared himself Emperor of Austria in the same year. The position of Holy Roman Emperor nonetheless continued until Francis II abdicated that position in 1806. In Eastern Europe, the monarchs of Russia also used to wield imperial authority as successors to the Eastern Roman Empire. Their status was officially recognized by the Holy Roman Emperor in 1514, although not officially used by the Russian monarchs until 1547. However, the Russian emperors are better known by their Russian-language title of Tsar even after Peter the Great adopted the title of Emperor of All Russia in 1721.\nHistorians have liberally used \"emperor\" and \"empire\" anachronistically and out of its Roman and European context to describe any large state from the past or the present. Some titles are considered equivalent to \"emperor\" or are translated as \"emperor\". Examples of that are\u00a0Roman emperors' titles, King of Kings, Khalifa, Huangdi, Cakravartin, Great Khan, Aztec monarchs' title, Inca monarchs' title, etc. Sometimes this reference has even extended to non-monarchically ruled states and their spheres of influence, such as the Athenian Empire of the late 5th century BC, the Angevin Empire of the Plantagenets and the Soviet and American \"empires\" of the Cold War era. However, such \"empires\" did not need to be headed by an \"emperor\". \"Empire\" became identified instead with vast territorial holdings rather than the title of its ruler by the mid-18th century.\nFor purposes of protocol, the size and scope of a kingdom or empire may determine precedence in international diplomatic relations, but currently, precedence among heads of state who are sovereigns\u2014whether they be kings, queens, emperors, empresses, princes, princesses and presidents may be determined by the size and scope or time that each one has been continuously in office. Outside the European context, \"emperor\" was the translation given to holders of titles who were accorded the same precedence as European emperors in diplomatic terms. In reciprocity, these rulers might accredit equal titles in their native languages to their European peers. Through centuries of international convention, this has become the dominant rule to identifying an emperor in the modern era.\nRoman Empire.\nClassical Antiquity.\nWhen Republican Rome turned into a \"de facto\" monarchy in the second half of the 1st century BC, at first there was no name for the title of the new type of monarch. Ancient Romans abhorred the name Rex (\"king\"), and it was critical to the political order to maintain the forms and pretenses of republican rule. Julius Caesar had been Dictator, an acknowledged and traditional office in Republican Rome. Caesar was not the first to hold it, but following his assassination the term was abhorred in Rome.\nAugustus, considered the first Roman emperor, established his hegemony by collecting on himself offices, titles, and honours of Republican Rome that had traditionally been distributed to different people, concentrating what had been distributed power in one man. One of these offices was \"princeps senatus\", (\"first man of the Senate\") and became changed into Augustus' chief honorific, \"princeps civitatis\" (\"first citizen\") from which the modern English word and title prince is descended. The first period of the Roman Empire, from 27 BC to AD 284, is called the \"principate\" for this reason. However, it was the informal descriptive of \"Imperator\" (\"commander\") that became the title increasingly favored by his successors. Previously bestowed on high officials and military commanders who had \"imperium\", Augustus reserved it exclusively to himself as the ultimate holder of all \"imperium\". (\"Imperium\" is Latin for the authority to command, one of a various types of authority delineated in Roman political thought.)\nBeginning with Augustus, \"Imperator\" appeared in the title of all Roman monarchs through the extinction of the Empire in 1453. After the reign of Augustus' immediate successor Tiberius, being proclaimed \"imperator\" was transformed into the act of accession to the head of state. Other honorifics used by the Roman emperors have also come to be synonyms for Emperor:\nAfter the turbulent Year of the Four Emperors in 69, the Flavian dynasty reigned for three decades. The succeeding Nervan-Antonian dynasty, ruling for most of the 2nd century, stabilised the empire. This epoch became known as the era of the \"Five Good Emperors\", and was followed by the short-lived Severan dynasty.\nDuring the Crisis of the 3rd century, barracks emperors succeeded one another at short intervals. Three short lived secessionist attempts had their own emperors: the Gallic Empire, the Britannic Empire, and the Palmyrene Empire though the latter used \"rex\" more regularly.\nThe Principate (27 BC \u2013 284 AD) period was succeeded by what is known as the Dominate (284 AD \u2013 527 AD), during which Emperor Diocletian tried to put the empire on a more formal footing. Diocletian sought to address the challenges of the Empire's now vast geography and the instability caused by the informality of succession by the creation of co-emperors and junior emperors. At one point, there were as many as five sharers of the \"imperium\" (see: Tetrarchy). In 325 AD Constantine I defeated his rivals and restored single emperor rule, but following his death the empire was divided among his sons. For a time the concept was of one empire ruled by multiple emperors with varying territory under their control, however following the death of Theodosius I the rule was divided between his two sons and increasingly became separate entities. The areas administered from Rome are referred to by historians the Western Roman Empire and those under the immediate authority of Constantinople called the Eastern Roman Empire or (after the Battle of Yarmouk in 636 AD) the Later Roman or Byzantine Empire. The subdivisions and co-emperor system were formally abolished by Emperor Zeno in 480 AD following the death of Julius Nepos last Western Emperor and the ascension of Odoacer as the \"de facto\" King of Italy in 476 AD.\nByzantine period.\nBefore the 4th Crusade.\nHistorians generally refer to the continuing Roman Empire in the east as the Byzantine Empire after Byzantium, the original name of the town that Constantine I would elevate to the Imperial capital as New Rome in AD 330. (The city is more commonly called Constantinople and is today named Istanbul). Although the empire was again subdivided and a co-emperor sent to Italy at the end of the fourth century, the office became unitary again only 95 years later at the request of the Roman Senate and following the death of Julius Nepos, last Western Emperor. This change was a recognition of the reality that little remained of Imperial authority in the areas that had been the Western Empire, with even Rome and Italy itself now ruled by the essentially autonomous Odoacer.\nThese Later Roman \"Byzantine\" emperors completed the transition from the idea of the emperor as a semi-republican official to the emperor as an absolute monarch. Of particular note was the translation of the Latin \"Imperator\" into the Greek \"Basileus\", after Emperor Heraclius changed the official language of the empire from Latin to Greek in AD 620. Basileus, a title which had long been used for Alexander the Great was already in common usage as the Greek word for the Roman emperor, but its definition and sense was \"King\" in Greek, essentially equivalent with the Latin \"Rex\". Byzantine period emperors also used the Greek word \"autokrator\", meaning \"one who rules himself\", or \"monarch\", which was traditionally used by Greek writers to translate the Latin \"dictator\". Essentially, the Greek language did not incorporate the nuances of the Ancient Roman concepts that distinguished \"imperium\" from other forms of political power.\nIn general usage, the Byzantine imperial title evolved from simply \"emperor\" (\"basileus\") to \"emperor of the Romans\" (\"basileus t\u014dn R\u014dmai\u014dn\") in the 9th century, to \"emperor and autocrat of the Romans\" (\"basileus kai autokrat\u014dr t\u014dn R\u014dmai\u014dn\") in the 10th. In fact, none of these (and other) additional epithets and titles had ever been completely discarded.\nOne important distinction between the post Constantine I (reigned AD 306\u2013337) emperors and their pagan predecessors was cesaropapism, the assertion that the emperor (or other head of state) is also the head of the Church. Although this principle was held by all emperors after Constantine, it met with increasing resistance and ultimately rejection by bishops in the west after the effective end of Imperial power there. This concept became a key element of the meaning of \"emperor\" in the Byzantine and Orthodox east, but went out of favor in the west with the rise of Roman Catholicism.\nThe Byzantine Empire also produced three women who effectively governed the state: the Empress Irene and the Empresses Zoe and Theodora.\nLatin emperors.\nIn 1204 Constantinople fell to the Venetians and the Franks in the Fourth Crusade. Following the tragedy of the horrific sacking of the city, the conquerors declared a new \"Empire of Romania\", known to historians as the Latin Empire of Constantinople, installing Baldwin IX, Count of Flanders, as Emperor. However, Byzantine resistance to the new empire meant that it was in constant struggle to establish itself. Byzantine Emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos succeeded in recapturing Constantinople in 1261. The Principality of Achaea, a vassal state the empire had created in Morea (Greece) intermittently continued to recognize the authority of the crusader emperors for another half century. Pretenders to the title continued among the European nobility until circa 1383.\nAfter the 4th Crusade.\nWith Constantinople occupied, claimants to the imperial succession styled themselves as emperor in the chief centers of resistance: The Laskarid dynasty in the Empire of Nicaea, the Komnenid dynasty in the Empire of Trebizond and the Doukid dynasty in the Despotate of Epirus. In 1248, Epirus recognized the Nicaean emperors, who subsequently recaptured Constantinople in 1261. The Trapezuntine emperor formally submitted in Constantinople in 1281, but frequently flouted convention by styling themselves emperor back in Trebizond thereafter.\nEurope.\nByzantium's close cultural and political interaction with its Balkan neighbors Bulgaria and Serbia, and with Russia (Kievan Rus', then Muscovy) led to the adoption of Byzantine imperial traditions in all of these countries.\nHoly Roman Empire.\nThe \"Emperor\" of the Romans' title was a reflection of the \"translatio imperii\" (\"transfer of rule\") principle that regarded the Holy Roman emperors as the inheritors of the title of Emperor of the Western Roman Empire, despite the continued existence of the Roman Empire in the east, hence the problem of two emperors.\nFrom the time of Otto the Great onward, much of the former Carolingian kingdom of Eastern Francia became the Holy Roman Empire. The prince-electors elected one of their peers as King of the Romans and King of Italy before being crowned by the Pope. The emperor could also pursue the election of his heir (usually a son) as King, who would then succeed him after his death. This junior king then bore the title of King of the Romans. Although technically already ruling, after the election he would be crowned as emperor by the pope. The last emperor to be crowned by the pope was Charles V; all emperors after him were technically \"emperors-elect\", but were universally referred to as \"emperor\".\nThe Holy Roman emperor was considered the first among those in power. He was also the first defender of Christianity. From 1452 to the end of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 (except in the years 1742 to 1745) only members of the House of Habsburg were Holy Roman emperors. Karl von Habsburg is currently the head of the House of Habsburg.\nAustrian Empire.\nThe first Austrian Emperor was the last Holy Roman Emperor, Franz II. In the face of aggressions by Napoleon, Francis feared for the future of the Holy Roman Empire. He wished to maintain his and his family's Imperial status in the event that the Holy Roman Empire should be dissolved, as it indeed was in 1806 when an Austrian-led army suffered a humiliating defeat at the Battle of Austerlitz. After which, the victorious Napoleon proceeded to dismantle the old \"Reich\" by severing a good portion from the empire and turning it into a separate Confederation of the Rhine. With the size of his imperial realm significantly reduced, Francis II, \"Holy Roman Emperor\" became Francis I, \"Emperor of Austria\". The new imperial title may have sounded less prestigious than the old one, but Francis' dynasty continued to rule from Austria and a Habsburg monarch was still an emperor (\"Kaiser\"), and not just merely a king (\"K\u00f6nig\"), in name. According to the historian Friedrich Heer, the Austrian Habsburg emperor remained an \"auctoritas\" of a special kind. He was \"the grandson of the Caesars\", he remained the patron of the Holy Church.\nThe title lasted just a little over one century until 1918, but it was never clear what territory constituted the \"Empire of Austria\". When Francis took the title in 1804, the Habsburg lands as a whole were dubbed the \"Kaisertum \u00d6sterreich\". \"Kaisertum\" might literally be translated as \"emperordom\" (on analogy with \"kingdom\") or \"emperor-ship\"; the term denotes specifically \"the territory ruled by an emperor\", and is thus somewhat more general than Reich, which in 1804 carried connotations of universal rule. Austria proper (as opposed to the complex of Habsburg lands as a whole) had been part of the Archduchy of Austria since the 15th century, and most of the other territories of the Empire had their own institutions and territorial history. There were some attempts at centralization, especially during the reign of Maria Theresa and her son Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor. These efforts were finalized in the early 19th century. When the Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen (Hungary) were given self-government in 1867, the non-Hungarian portions were called the Empire of Austria. They were officially known as the \"Kingdoms and Lands Represented in the Imperial Council (\"Reichsrat\")\". The title of Emperor of Austria and the associated Empire were both abolished at the end World War I in 1918, when German Austria became a republic and the other kingdoms and lands represented in the Imperial Council established their independence or adhesion to other states.\nThe \"Kaisers\" of the Austrian Empire (1804\u20131918) were Franz I (1804\u20131835), Ferdinand I (1835\u20131848), Franz Joseph I (1848\u20131916) and Karl I (1916\u20131918). The current head of the House of Habsburg is Karl von Habsburg.\nBulgaria.\nIn 913, Simeon I of Bulgaria was crowned Emperor (Tsar, originally more fully Tsesar, \"c\u011bsar\"') of his own people by the Patriarch of Constantinople and Imperial regent Nicholas Mystikos outside the Byzantine capital. In its final expanded form, under the Second Bulgarian Empire the title read \"Emperor and Autocrat of all Bulgarians and Greeks\" (\u0426\u0430\u0440 \u0438 \u0441\u0430\u043c\u043e\u0434\u044a\u0440\u0436\u0435\u0446 \u043d\u0430 \u0432\u0441\u0438\u0447\u043a\u0438 \u0431\u044a\u043b\u0433\u0430\u0440\u0438 \u0438 \u0433\u044a\u0440\u0446\u0438, \"Car i samod\u0103r\u017eec na vsi\u010dki b\u0103lgari i g\u0103rci\" in the modern vernacular). The Roman component in the Bulgarian imperial title indicated both rule over Greek speakers and the derivation of the imperial tradition from the Romans, however this component was never recognised by the Byzantine court.\nByzantine recognition of Simeon's imperial title was revoked by the succeeding Byzantine government. The decade 914\u2013924 was spent in destructive warfare between Byzantium and Bulgaria over this and other matters of conflict. The Bulgarian monarch, who had further irritated his Byzantine counterpart by claiming the title \"Emperor of the Romans\" (\"basileus t\u014dn R\u014dmai\u014dn\"), was eventually recognized, as \"Emperor of the Bulgarians\" (\"basileus t\u014dn Boulgar\u014dn\") by the Byzantine Emperor Romanos I Lakapenos in 924. Byzantine recognition of the imperial dignity of the Bulgarian monarch and the patriarchal dignity of the Bulgarian patriarch was again confirmed at the conclusion of permanent peace and a Bulgarian-Byzantine dynastic marriage in 927. In the meantime, the Bulgarian imperial title may have been also tacitly confirmed by the pope, as claimed in later Bulgarian diplomatic correspondence. The Bulgarian imperial title \"tsar\" was adopted by all Bulgarian monarchs up to the fall of Bulgaria under Ottoman rule. Despite the attempt of Pope Innocent III to limit the Bulgarian monarch to the title of King (\"Rex\"), Kaloyan of Bulgaria considered himself an Emperor (\"Imperator\") and his successor Boril of Bulgaria was specifically accused of improperly using the imperial title by his neighbor, the Latin Emperor Henry of Flanders. Nevertheless, the Bulgarian imperial title was recognized by its neighbors and trading partners, including Byzantium, Hungary, Serbia, Venice, Genoa, Dubrovnik. 14th-century Bulgarian literary compositions saw the Bulgarian capital (Tarnovo) as a successor of Rome and Constantinople.\nAfter Bulgaria obtained full independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1908, its monarch, who was previously styled \"Knyaz\", Prince, took the traditional title of \"Tsar\", this time translated as King. Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha is the former Tsar Simeon II of Bulgaria.\nFrance.\nThe kings of the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\" and the July Monarchy used the title \"Empereur de France\" in diplomatic correspondence and treaties with the Ottoman emperor from at least 1673 onwards. The Ottomans insisted on this elevated style while refusing to recognize the Holy Roman emperors or the Russian tsars because of their rival claims of the Roman crown. In short, it was an indirect insult by the Ottomans to the HRE and the Russians. The French kings also used it for Morocco (1682) and Persia (1715).\nFirst French Empire.\nNapoleon Bonaparte, who was already First Consul of the French Republic (\"Premier Consul de la R\u00e9publique fran\u00e7aise\") for life, declared himself Emperor of the French (\"Empereur des Fran\u00e7ais\") on 18 May 1804, thus creating the French Empire (\"Empire Fran\u00e7ais\").\nNapoleon relinquished the title of Emperor of the French on 6 April and again on 11 April 1814. Napoleon's infant son, Napoleon II, was recognized by the Council of Peers, as Emperor from the moment of his father's abdication, and therefore reigned (as opposed to ruled) as Emperor for fifteen days, 22 June to 7 July 1815.\nElba.\nSince 3 May 1814, the Sovereign Principality of Elba was created as a miniature non-hereditary monarchy under the exiled French Emperor Napoleon I. According to the Treaty of Fontainebleau (1814), Napoleon I was allowed to enjoy the imperial title for life. The islands were \"not\" restyled an empire.\nOn 26 February 1815, Napoleon abandoned Elba for France, reviving the French Empire for a Hundred Days; the Allies declared an end to Napoleon's sovereignty over Elba on 25 March 1815, and on 31 March 1815 Elba was ceded to the restored Grand Duchy of Tuscany by the Congress of Vienna. After his final defeat, Napoleon was treated as a general by the British authorities during his second exile to Atlantic Isle of St. Helena. His title was a matter of dispute with the governor of St Helena, who insisted on addressing him as \"General Bonaparte\", despite the \"historical reality that he had been an emperor\" and therefore retained the title.\nSecond French Empire.\nNapoleon I's nephew, Napoleon III, resurrected the title of emperor on 2 December 1852, after establishing the Second French Empire in a presidential coup, subsequently approved by a plebiscite. His reign was marked by large scale public works, the development of social policy, and the extension of France's influence throughout the world. During his reign, he also set about creating the Second Mexican Empire (headed by his choice of Maximilian I of Mexico, a member of the House of Habsburg), to regain France's hold in the Americas and to achieve greatness for the 'Latin' race. Napoleon III was deposed on 4 September 1870, after France's defeat in the Franco-Prussian War. The Third Republic followed and after the death of his son Napoleon (IV), in 1879 during the Zulu War, the Bonapartist movement split, and the Third Republic was to last until 1940.\nThe role of head of the House of Bonaparte is claimed by Jean-Christophe Napol\u00e9on and Charles Napol\u00e9on.\nIberian Peninsula.\nSpain.\nThe origin of the title \"Imperator totius Hispaniae\" (Latin for \"Emperor of All Spain\") is murky. It was associated with the Leonese monarchy perhaps as far back as Alfonso the Great (\"r.\" 866\u2013910). The last two kings of its Astur-Leonese dynasty were called emperors in a contemporary source.\nKing Sancho III of Navarre conquered Leon in 1034 and began using it. His son, Ferdinand I of Castile also took the title in 1039. Ferdinand's son, Alfonso VI of Le\u00f3n and Castile took the title in 1077. It then passed to his son-in-law, Alfonso I of Aragon in 1109. His stepson and Alfonso VI's grandson, Alfonso VII was the only one who actually had an imperial coronation in 1135.\nThe title was not exactly hereditary but self-proclaimed by those who had, wholly or partially, united the Christian northern part of the Iberian Peninsula, often at the expense of killing rival siblings. The popes and Holy Roman emperors protested at the usage of the imperial title as a usurpation of leadership in western Christendom. After Alfonso VII's death in 1157, the title was abandoned, and the kings who used it are not commonly mentioned as having been \"emperors\", in Spanish or other historiography.\nAfter the fall of the Byzantine Empire, the legitimate heir to the throne, Andreas Palaiologos, willed away his claim to Ferdinand and Isabella in 1503.\nPortugal.\nAfter the independence and proclamation of the Empire of Brazil from the Kingdom of Portugal by Prince Pedro, who became Emperor, in 1822, his father, King John VI of Portugal briefly held the honorific style of Titular Emperor of Brazil and the treatment of \"His Imperial and Royal Majesty\" under the 1825 Treaty of Rio de Janeiro, by which Portugal recognized the independence of Brazil. The style of Titular Emperor was a life title, and became extinct upon the holder's demise. John VI held the imperial title for a few months only, from the ratification of the Treaty in November 1825 until his death in March 1826. During those months, however, as John's imperial title was purely honorific while his son, Pedro I, remained the sole monarch of the Brazilian Empire. Duarte Pio is the current head of the House of Braganza.\nGreat Britain.\nIn the late 3rd century, by the end of the epoch of the \"barracks emperors\" in Rome, there were two Britannic emperors, reigning for about a decade. After the end of Roman rule in Britain, the Imperator Cunedda forged the Kingdom of Gwynedd in northern Wales, but all his successors were titled kings and princes.\nEngland.\nThere was no consistent title for the king of England before 1066, and monarchs chose to style themselves as they pleased. Imperial titles were used inconsistently, beginning with Athelstan in 930 and ended with the Norman conquest of England. Empress Matilda (1102\u20131167) is the only English monarch commonly referred to as \"emperor\" or \"empress\", but she acquired her title through her marriage to Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor.\nDuring the rule of Henry VIII the Statute in Restraint of Appeals declared that 'this realm of England is an Empire...governed by one Supreme Head and King having the dignity and royal estate of the imperial Crown of the same'. This was in the context of the divorce of Catherine of Aragon and the English Reformation, to emphasize that England had never accepted the quasi-imperial claims of the papacy. Hence England and, by extension its modern successor state, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, is according to English law an Empire ruled by a King endowed with the imperial dignity. However, this has not led to the creation of the \"title\" of Emperor in England, nor in Great Britain, nor in the United Kingdom.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn 1801, George III rejected the title of Emperor when offered. The only period when British monarchs held the title of \"Emperor\" in a dynastic succession started when the title Empress of India was created for Queen Victoria. The government led by Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli, conferred the additional title upon her by an Act of Parliament, reputedly to assuage the monarch's irritation at being, as a mere Queen, notionally inferior to the emperors of Russia, Germany, and Austria. That included her own daughter (Princess Victoria, who was the wife of the reigning German Emperor). Hence, \"Queen Victoria felt handicapped in the battle of protocol by not being an Empress herself\". The Indian Imperial designation was also formally justified as the expression of Britain succeeding the former Mughal Emperor as suzerain over hundreds of princely states. The Indian Independence Act 1947 provided for the abolition of the use of the title \"Emperor of India\" by the British monarch, but this was not executed by King George VI until a royal proclamation on 22 June 1948. Despite this, George VI continued as king of India until 1950 and as king of Pakistan until his death in 1952.\nThe last Empress of India was George VI's wife, Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother.\nGerman Empire.\nUnder the guise of idealism giving way to realism, German nationalism rapidly shifted from its liberal and democratic character in 1848 to Prussian prime minister Otto von Bismarck's authoritarian \"Realpolitik\". Bismarck wanted to unify the rival German states to achieve his aim of a conservative, Prussian-dominated Germany. Three wars led to military successes and helped to convince German people to do this: the Second war of Schleswig against Denmark in 1864, the Austro-Prussian War against Austria in 1866, and the Franco-Prussian War against the Second French Empire in 1870\u201371. During the Siege of Paris in 1871, the North German Confederation, supported by its allies from southern Germany, formed the German Empire with the proclamation of the Prussian king Wilhelm I as German Emperor in the Hall of Mirrors at the Palace of Versailles, to the humiliation of the French, who ceased to resist only days later.\nAfter his death he was succeeded by his son Frederick III who was only emperor for 99 days. In the same year his son Wilhelm II became the third emperor within a year. He was the last German emperor. After the empire's defeat in World War I the empire, called the German Reich, had a president as head of state instead of an emperor. The use of the word \"Reich\" was abandoned following World War II.\nRussia.\nIn 1472, the niece of the last Byzantine emperor, Sophia Palaiologina, married Ivan III, grand prince of Moscow, who began championing the idea of Russia being the successor to the Byzantine Empire. This idea was represented more emphatically in the composition the monk Filofej addressed to their son Vasili III. In 1480, after ending Muscovy's dependence on its overlords of the Great Horde, Ivan III began the usage of the titles Tsar and Autocrat (\"samoderzhets\"). His insistence on recognition as such by the emperor of the Holy Roman Empire since 1489 resulted in the granting of this recognition in 1514 by Emperor Maximilian I to Vasili III. His son Ivan IV emphatically crowned himself Tsar of Russia on 16 January 1547. The word \"Tsar\" derives from Latin Caesar, but this title was used in Russia as equivalent to \"King\"; the error occurred when medieval Russian clerics referred to the biblical Jewish kings with the same title that was used to designate Roman and Byzantine rulers \u2014 \"Caesar\".\nOn 31 October 1721, Peter I was proclaimed Emperor by the Governing Senate. The title used was Latin \"\"Imperator\", which is a westernizing form equivalent to the traditional Slavic title \"Tsar\"\". He based his claim partially upon a letter discovered in 1717 written in 1514 from Maximilian I to Vasili III, in which the Holy Roman Emperor used the term in referring to Vasili.\nA formal address to the ruling Russian monarch adopted thereafter was 'Your Imperial Majesty'. The crown prince was addressed as 'Your Imperial Highness'.\nThe title has not been used in Russia since the abdication of Emperor Nicholas II on 15 March 1917.\nThe Russian Empire produced four reigning Empresses, all in the eighteenth century. These were Catherine I, Anne, Elizabeth, and Catherine II.\nThe role of head of the House of Romanov is claimed by Grand Duchess Maria Vladimirovna of Russia (Great-great-granddaughter of Alexander II of Russia), Prince Andrew Romanoff (great-great-grandson of Nicholas I of Russia), and Prince Karl Emich of Leiningen (Great-grandson of Grand Duke Kirill Vladimirovich of Russia).\nSerbia.\nIn 1345, the Serbian King Stefan Uro\u0161 IV Du\u0161an proclaimed himself Emperor (Tsar) and was crowned as such at Skopje on Easter 1346 by the newly created Serbian Patriarch, and by the Patriarch of Bulgaria and the autocephalous Archbishop of Ohrid. His imperial title was recognized by Bulgaria and various other neighbors and trading partners but not by the Byzantine Empire. In its final standardized form, the Serbian imperial title read \"Emperor of Serbs and Greeks\" (\u0446\u0430\u0440 \u0421\u0440\u0431\u0430 \u0438 \u0413\u0440\u043a\u0430, \"car Srba i Grka\" in modern Serbian). It was only employed by two monarchs in Serbia, Stefan Uro\u0161 IV Du\u0161an and his son Stefan Uro\u0161 V, becoming extinct after the latter's death in 1371. A half-brother of Du\u0161an, Simeon Uro\u0161, and then his son Jovan Uro\u0161, claimed the same title, until the latter's abdication in 1373, while ruling as dynasts in Thessaly. The \"Greek\" component in the Serbian imperial title indicates both rule over Greek speakers and the derivation of the imperial tradition from the Romans. A renegade Hungarian-Serb commander, Jovan Nenad, who claimed to be a descendant of Serbian and Byzantine rulers, styled himself Emperor.\nThe Americas.\nPre-Columbian traditions.\nThe Aztec and Inca traditions are unrelated to one another. Both were conquered under the reign of King Charles I of Spain who was simultaneously emperor-elect of the Holy Roman Empire during the fall of the Aztecs and fully emperor during the fall of the Incas. Incidentally by being king of Spain, he was also Roman (Byzantine) emperor in pretence through Andreas Palaiologos. The translations of their titles were provided by the Spanish.\nAztec Empire.\nThe only pre-Columbian North American rulers to be commonly called emperors were the \"Huey Tlatoani\" () of the Mexica city-states of Tenochtitlan, Tlacopan and Texcoco, which along with their allies and tributaries are popularly known as the Aztec Empire (1375\u20131521). \"Tlatoani\" is a generic Nahuatl word for \"speaker\"; however, most English translators use \"king\" for their translation, thus rendering \"huey tlatoani\" as \"great king\" or \"emperor.\"\nThe Triple Alliance was an elected monarchy chosen by the elite. The emperors of Tenochtitlan and Texcoco were nominally equals, each receiving two-fifths of tribute from the vassal kingdoms, whereas the emperor of Tlacopan was a junior member and only received one-fifth of the tribute, due to the fact that Tlacopan was a newcomer to the alliance. Despite the nominal equality, Tenochtitlan eventually assumed a de facto dominant role in the Empire, to the point that even the emperors of Tlacopan and Texcoco would acknowledge Tenochtitlan's effective supremacy. Spanish conquistador Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s executed Emperor Cuauht\u00e9moc and installed puppet rulers who became vassals for Spain.\nInca Empire.\nThe only pre-Columbian South American rulers to be commonly called emperors were the \"Sapa Inca\" of the Inca Empire (1438\u20131533). Spanish conquistador Francisco Pizarro, conquered the Inca for Spain, killed Emperor Atahualpa, and installed puppets as well. Atahualpa may actually be considered a usurper as he had achieved power by killing his half-brother and he did not perform the required coronation with the imperial crown \"mascaipacha\" by the \"Huillaq Uma\" (high priest).\nPost-Columbian Americas.\nBrazil.\nWhen Napoleon I ordered the invasion of Portugal in 1807 because it refused to join the Continental System, the Portuguese Braganzas moved their capital to Rio de Janeiro to avoid the fate of the Spanish Bourbons (Napoleon I arrested them and made his brother Joseph king). When the French general Jean-Andoche Junot arrived in Lisbon, the Portuguese fleet had already left with all the local elite.\nIn 1808, under a British naval escort, the fleet arrived in Brazil. Later, in 1815, the Portuguese Prince Regent (since 1816 King Jo\u00e3o VI) proclaimed the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves, as a union of three kingdoms, lifting Brazil from its colonial status.\nAfter the fall of Napoleon I and the Liberal revolution in Portugal, the Portuguese royal family returned to Europe (1821). Prince Pedro of Braganza (King Jo\u00e3o's older son) stayed in South America acting as regent of the local kingdom, but, two years later in 1822, he proclaimed himself Pedro I, first Emperor of Brazil. He did, however, recognize his father, Jo\u00e3o VI, as \"Titular Emperor of Brazil\" \u2014a purely honorific title\u2014until Jo\u00e3o VI's death in 1826.\nThe empire came to an end in 1889, with the overthrow of Emperor Pedro II (Pedro I's son and successor), when the Brazilian republic was proclaimed.\nToday the headship of the Imperial House of Brazil is disputed between two branches of the House of Orl\u00e9ans-Braganza.\nHaiti.\nHaiti was declared an empire by its ruler, Jean-Jacques Dessalines, who made himself Jacques I, on 20 May 1805. He was assassinated the next year. Haiti again became an empire from 1849 to 1859 under Faustin Soulouque.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, the First Mexican Empire was the first of two empires created. After the declaration of independence on 15 September 1821, it was the intention of the Mexican parliament to establish a commonwealth whereby the king of Spain, Ferdinand VII, would also be Emperor of Mexico, but in which both countries were to be governed by separate laws and with their own legislative offices. Should the king refuse the position, the law provided for a member of the House of Bourbon to accede to the Mexican throne.\nFerdinand VII, however, did not recognize the independence and said that Spain would not allow any other European prince to take the throne of Mexico. By request of Parliament, the president of the regency Agust\u00edn de Iturbide was proclaimed emperor of Mexico on 12 July 1822 as Agust\u00edn I. Agust\u00edn de Iturbide was the general who helped secure Mexican independence from Spanish rule, but was overthrown by the Plan of Casa Mata.\nIn 1863, the invading French, under Napoleon III (see above), in alliance with Mexican conservatives and nobility, helped create the Second Mexican Empire, and invited Archduke Maximilian, of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine, younger brother of the Austrian Emperor Franz Josef I, to become emperor Maximilian I of Mexico. The childless Maximilian and his consort Empress Carlota of Mexico, daughter of Leopold I of Belgium, adopted Agust\u00edn's grandsons Agustin and Salvador as his heirs to bolster his claim to the throne of Mexico. Maximilian and Carlota made Chapultepec Castle their home, which has been the only palace in North America to house sovereigns. After the withdrawal of French protection in 1867, Maximilian was captured and executed by the liberal forces of Benito Ju\u00e1rez.\nThis empire led to French influence in the Mexican culture and also immigration from France, Belgium, and Switzerland to Mexico. Maximilian's closest living agnatic relative is Karl von Habsburg, the head of the House of Habsburg.\nMiddle East.\nIn Persia, from the time of Darius the Great, Persian rulers used the title \"King of Kings\" (\"Shahanshah\" in Persian) since they had dominion over peoples from the borders of India to the borders of Greece and Egypt. Alexander the Great probably crowned himself \"shahanshah\" after conquering Persia, bringing the phrase \"basileus ton basileon\" to Greek. It is also known that Tigranes the Great, king of Armenia, was named as the king of kings when he made his empire after defeating the Parthians. Georgian title \"mephet'mephe\" has the same meaning.\nThe last \"shahanshah\" (Mohammad Reza Pahlavi) was ousted in 1979 following the Iranian Revolution. \"Shahanshah\" is usually translated as \"king of kings\" or simply \"king\" for ancient rulers of the Achaemenid, Arsacid, and Sassanid dynasties, and often shortened to \"shah\" for rulers since the Safavid dynasty in the 16th century. Iranian rulers were typically regarded in the West as emperors.\nThe title King of Kings takes various forms depending on the language, and was used not only in Iran but also in countries surrounding Iran.\nIran.\nPersian monarchs took the imperial title of shahenshah (king of kings) to show superiority towards subordinate kings (shah). The title of the empress consort was Shahbanu. The Sassanid monarchs used the title King of kings of Iranians and non-Iranians to denote their rule over non-Iranian lands.\nOttoman Empire.\nOttoman rulers held many titles and appellations denoting their Imperial status. These included: Sultan of Sultans, Padishah, and Hakan.\nThe full style of the Ottoman sultan once the empire's frontiers had stabilized became:\nAfter the Ottoman capture of Constantinople in 1453, the Ottoman sultans began to style themselves Kaysar-i Rum (Ceaser of the Romans) as they asserted themselves to be the heirs to the Roman Empire by right of conquest. The title was of such importance to them that it led them to eliminate the various Byzantine successor states \u2013 and therefore rival claimants \u2013 over the next eight years. Though the term \"emperor\" was rarely used by Westerners of the Ottoman sultan, it was generally accepted by Westerners that he had imperial status.\nHarun Osman is currently the head of the Ottoman dynasty.\nIndian subcontinent.\nSamrajya and Chakravarti systems.\nIn the Vedic period, there was a federal imperial system called the \"Samrajya system\" and \"Samrat\" () was the title of the emperor of that system. Those monarchs, who could bring under subjection many kings like \"rajan\" \"and maharajan\", claimed the title of \"Samrat\".\nChandragupta of the Maurya Empire is referred to as the first emperor of the mostly unified Indian subcontinent. Various other monarchs such as Pravarasena I, the Vakataka, and Yashodharman, the Aulikara, used the title of \"Samrat\".\nAnother type of Indian imperialism was called the \"Chakravarti system\". The first references to a \"Chakravartin\" as a secular monarch appear in reference to Ashoka of the Maurya Empire.\nThe Pallava, Chola, Pandya and Vijayanagar dynasties claimed \"Chakravartin\" status. Kharavela assumed the title of Kalinga-chakravartin.\nMauryan Empire.\nFrom 322 to 185 BC the Indian subcontinent was dominated by the Maurya dynasty of Magadha, whose monarchs used the title of Chakravarti Samrat of Jambudv\u012bpa.\nDelhi Sultanate.\nFrom 1206 to 1526 most of the Indian subcontinent was dominated by the Muslim Delhi Sultanate, whose monarchs used the title Sultan of Sultans.\nMughal Empire.\nFrom the 14th century until the 19th century the Indian subcontinent was dominated by predominantly Muslim rulers like the Mughals, whose rulers used the title Shahenshah and Padishah (or Badshah) of Hindustan.\nBritish Raj.\nWhen the British monarchs ruled over India, they adopted the additional title of \"Kaisar-i-Hind\" (transl. Emperor of India).\nRegional emperors.\nVakataka.\nThe Vakataka ruler, Pravarasena I was titled \"Samrat\" after he established his overlordship over the Deccan. The Vakataka dominion was divided between his four sons, who did not use imperial titles.\nKalinga.\nThe ruler of Kalinga, Kharavela of the Mahameghavahana dynasty, used the title \"Kalinga-Chakravartin\". His successors didn't retain the title.\nMalwa.\nThe ruler of Malava, Yashodharman Vishnuvardhana of the Aulikara dynasty, used the title \"Samrat\" after his territorial conquest of Hunnic territories, establishing the Malava Empire which collapsed after his death in 545.\nChedi.\nLakshmikarna proclaimed himself emperor or \"Chakravartin\" in 1052. He was a member of the Kalachuri dynasty.\nChola.\nThe Imperial Cholas used the title Chakravartigal.\nVijayanagara.\nFrom 1336 to 1646, South India was ruled by the Vijayanagara Empire, whose monarchs used the title of Chakravarti Raya of Karnata.\nAfrica.\nEthiopia.\nFrom 1270 the Solomonic dynasty of Ethiopia used the title , literally \"King of Kings\". The use of the \"king of kings\" style began a millennium earlier in this region, however, with the title being used by the kings of Aksum, beginning with Sembrouthes in the 3rd century.\nAnother title used by this dynasty was . translates as Empress, and was used by the only reigning empress, Zewditu, along with the official title (\"Queen of Kings\").\nIn 1936, the Italian king Victor Emmanuel III claimed the title of emperor after Ethiopia was occupied by Italy during the Second Italo-Abyssinian War. After the defeat of the Italians by the British and the Ethiopians in 1941, Haile Selassie was restored to the throne but Victor Emmanuel did not relinquish his claim until 1943, even though he had no standing to the title.\nThe current head of the Solomonic dynasty is Zera Yacob Amha Selassie.\nCentral African Empire.\nIn 1976, President Jean-B\u00e9del Bokassa of the Central African Republic, proclaimed the country to be an autocratic Central African Empire, and made himself Emperor as Bokassa I. The expenses of his coronation ceremony actually bankrupted the country. He was overthrown three years later and the republic was restored.\nEast Asia.\n\u7687\u5e1d is the title of emperors in East Asia. An emperor is called \"Hu\u00e1ngd\u00ec\" in Chinese, \"Hwangje\" in Korean, \"Ho\u00e0ng \u0111\u1ebf\" in Vietnamese, and \"K\u014dtei\" in Japanese, but these are all just their respective pronunciations of the Chinese character \u7687\u5e1d. But, the Japanese call only their emperors with the special title \"Tenn\u014d\" (\u5929\u7687).\nThe rulers of China and (once Westerners became aware of the role) Japan were always accepted in the West as emperors, and referred to as such. The claims of other East Asian monarchies to the title may have been accepted for diplomatic purposes, but it was not necessarily used in more general contexts.\nChina.\nThe East Asian tradition is different from the Roman tradition, having arisen separately. What links them together is the use of the Chinese logographs \u7687 (\"hu\u00e1ng\") and \u5e1d (\"d\u00ec\") which together or individually are imperial. Because of the cultural influence of China, China's neighbors adopted these titles or had their native titles conform in \"hanzi\". Anyone who spoke to the emperor was to address the emperor as b\u00ecxi\u00e0 (\u965b\u4e0b, lit. the \"Bottom of the Steps\"), corresponding to the Imperial Majesty\"; sh\u00e8ngsh\u00e0ng (\u8056\u4e0a, lit. Holy Highness); or w\u00e0nsu\u00ec (\u4e07\u5c81, lit. \"You, of Ten Thousand Years\").\nIn 221 BC, Ying Zheng, who was king of Qin at the time, proclaimed himself \"Shi Huangdi\" (\u59cb\u7687\u5e1d), which translates as \"first emperor\". \"Huangdi\" is composed of \"huang\" (\"august one\", \u7687) and \"di\" (\"sage-king\", \u5e1d), and referred to legendary/mythological sage-emperors living several millennia earlier, of which three were \"huang\" and five were \"di\". Thus Ying Zheng became Qin Shi Huang, abolishing the system where the \"huang\"/\"di\" titles were reserved to dead and/or mythological rulers. Since then, the title \"king\" became a lower ranked title, and later divided into two grades. Although not as popular, the title \u738b \"wang\" (king or prince) was still used by many monarchs and dynasties in China up to the Taipings in the 19th century. \u738b is pronounced \"v\u01b0\u01a1ng\" in Vietnamese, \"\u014d\" in Japanese, and \"wang\" in Korean.\nThe imperial title continued in China until the Qing dynasty was overthrown in 1912. The title was briefly revived from 12 December 1915 to 22 March 1916 by President Yuan Shikai and again in early July 1917 when General Zhang Xun attempted to restore last Qing emperor Puyi to the throne. Puyi retained the title and attributes of a foreign emperor, as a personal status, until 1924. After the Japanese occupied Manchuria in 1931, they proclaimed it to be the Empire of Manchukuo, and Puyi became emperor of Manchukuo. This empire ceased to exist when it was occupied by the Soviet Red Army in 1945.\nIn general, an emperor would have one empress (\"Huanghou\", \u7687\u540e) at one time, although posthumous entitlement to empress for a concubine was not uncommon. The earliest known usage of \"huanghou\" was in the Han dynasty. The emperor would generally select the empress from his concubines. In subsequent dynasties, when the distinction between wife and concubine became more accentuated, the crown prince would have chosen an empress-designate before his reign. Imperial China produced only one reigning empress, Wu Zetian, and she used the same Chinese title as an emperor (\"Huangdi\", \u7687\u5e1d). Wu Zetian then reigned for about 15 years (AD 690\u2013705).\nUnder the tributary system of China, monarchs of Korea and Vietnam sometimes called themselves \"emperor\" in their country. They introduced themselves as \"king\" for China and other countries (Emperor at home, king abroad). In Japan, Ashikaga Yoshimitsu a shogun was granted title of \"King of Japan\" for trade by the Ming emperor. However, the Shogun was a subject of the Japanese emperor. It was contrary to rules of tributary system, but the Ming emperor connived it for the purpose of suppressing the Wokou.\nJapan.\nThe earliest emperor recorded in and is Emperor Jimmu, who is said to be a descendant of Amaterasu's grandson Ninigi who descended from Heaven (Tenson k\u014drin). If one believes what is written in , the emperors have an unbroken direct male lineage that goes back more than 2,600 years.\nIn ancient Japan, the earliest titles for the sovereign were either \u30e4\u30de\u30c8\u5927\u738b/\u5927\u541b (\"yamato \u014dkimi\", Grand King of Yamato), \u502d\u738b/\u502d\u56fd\u738b (\"wa\u014d\"/\"wakoku\u014d\", King of Wa, used externally), or \u6cbb\u5929\u4e0b\u5927\u738b (\"amenoshita shiroshimesu \u014dkimi\", Grand King who rules all under heaven, used internally).\nIn 607, Empress Suiko sent a diplomatic document to China, which she wrote \"the emperor of the land of the rising sun (\u65e5\u51fa\u8655\u5929\u5b50) sends a document to the emperor of the land of the setting sun (\u65e5\u6c92\u8655\u5929\u5b50)\" and began to use the title emperor externally. As early as the 7th century, the word \u5929\u7687 (which can be read either as \"sumera no mikoto\", divine order, or as \"tenn\u014d\", Heavenly Emperor, the latter being derived from a Tang Chinese term referring to the Pole star around which all other stars revolve) began to be used. The earliest use of this term is found on a wooden slat, or \"mokkan\", unearthed in Asuka-mura, Nara Prefecture in 1998. The slat dated back to the reign of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. The reading 'Tenn\u014d' has become the standard title for the Japanese sovereign up to the present age. The term \u5e1d (\"mikado\", Emperor) is also found in literary sources.\nIn the Japanese language, the word \"tenn\u014d\" is restricted to Japan's own monarch; \"k\u014dtei\" (\u7687\u5e1d) is usually used for foreign emperors. Historically, retired emperors often kept power over a child-emperor as de facto regent. For a long time, a \"sh\u014dgun\" (formally the imperial military dictator, but made hereditary) or an imperial regent wielded actual political power. In fact, through much of Japanese history, the emperor has been little more than a figurehead. The Meiji Restoration restored practical abilities and the political system under Emperor Meiji. The last shogun Tokugawa Yoshinobu resigned in 1868.\nAfter World War II, all claims of divinity were dropped (see Ningen-sengen). The Diet acquired all prerogative powers of the Crown, reverting the latter to a ceremonial role. By 1979, after the short-lived Central African Empire (1976\u20131979), Emperor Sh\u014dwa was the only monarch in the world with the title emperor.\nAs of the early 21st century, Japan's succession law prohibits a female from ascending the throne. With the birth of a daughter as the first child of the then-Crown Prince Naruhito, Japan considered abandoning that rule. However, shortly after the announcement that Princess Kiko was pregnant with her third child, the proposal to alter the Imperial Household Law was suspended by then-Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi. On 3 January 2007, as the child turned out to be a son, Prime Minister Shinz\u014d Abe announced that he would drop the proposal.\nEmperor Naruhito is the 126th monarch according to Japan's traditional order of succession. The second and third in line of succession are Fumihito, Prince Akishino and Prince Hisahito. Historically, Japan has had eight reigning empresses who used the genderless title \"Tenn\u014d\", rather than the female consort title \"k\u014dg\u014d\" (\u7687\u540e) or \"ch\u016bg\u016b\" (\u4e2d\u5bae). There is ongoing discussion of the Japanese Imperial succession controversy. Although current Japanese law prohibits female succession, all Japanese emperors claim to trace their lineage to \"Amaterasu\", the Sun Goddess of the Shint\u014d religion. Thus, the emperor is thought to be the highest authority of the Shinto religion, and one of his duties is to perform Shinto rituals for the people of Japan.\nKorea.\nSome rulers of Goguryeo (37 BC\u2013AD 668) used the title of \"Taewang\" (), literally translated as \"Greatest King\". The title of \"Taewang\" was also used by some rulers of Silla (57 BC\u2013AD 935), including Beopheung and Jinheung.\nThe rulers of Balhae (698\u2013926) internally called themselves \"Seongwang\" (; lit. \"Holy King\").\nThe rulers of Goryeo (918\u20131392) used the titles of emperor and \"Son of Heaven of the East of the Ocean\" (). Goryeo's imperial system ended in 1270 with capitulation to the Mongol Empire.\nIn 1897, Gojong, the king of Joseon, proclaimed the founding of the Korean Empire (1897\u20131910), becoming the emperor of Korea. He declared the era name of \"Gwangmu\" (), meaning \"Bright and Martial\". The Korean Empire lasted until 1910, when it was annexed by the Empire of Japan.\nMongolia.\nThe \"Book of Wei\", a Chinese history book, records that the title Khagan and the title Hu\u00e1ngd\u00ec are the same. The title Khagan (khan of khans or grand khan) was held by Genghis Khan, founder of the Mongol Empire in 1206; he also formally took the Chinese title \"huangdi\", as \"Genghis Emperor\" ( ). Only the Khagans from Genghis Khan to the fall of the Yuan dynasty in 1368 are normally referred to as emperors in English.\nVietnam.\n\u0110\u1ea1i Vi\u1ec7t Kingdom (40\u201343, 544\u2013602, 938\u20131407, 1427\u20131945) (The first ruler of Vietnam to take the title of Emperor (Ho\u00e0ng \u0110\u1ebf) was the founder of the Early L\u00fd dynasty, L\u00fd Nam \u0110\u1ebf, in the year AD 544)\nNg\u00f4 Quy\u1ec1n, the first ruler of \u0110\u1ea1i Vi\u1ec7t as an independent state, used the title \"V\u01b0\u01a1ng\" (\u738b, \"King\"). However, after the death of Ng\u00f4 Quy\u1ec1n, the country immersed in a civil war known as Anarchy of the 12 Warlords that lasted for over 20 years. In the end, \u0110inh B\u1ed9 L\u0129nh unified the country after defeating all the warlords and became the first ruler of \u0110\u1ea1i Vi\u1ec7t to use the title \"Ho\u00e0ng \u0110\u1ebf\" (\u7687\u5e1d, \"Emperor\") in 968. Succeeding rulers in Vietnam then continued to use this Emperor title until 1806 when this title was stopped being used for a century.\n\u0110inh B\u1ed9 L\u0129nh was not the first to claim the title of \"\u0110\u1ebf\" (\u5e1d, \"Emperor\"). Before him, L\u00fd B\u00ed and Mai Th\u00fac Loan also claimed this title. However, their rules were short-lived.\nThe Vietnamese emperors also gave this title to their ancestors who were lords or influential figures in the previous dynasty, as did the Chinese emperors. This practice was one of the many indications that Vietnam considered itself an equal to China which remained intact up to the twentieth century.\nIn 1802 the newly established Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty requested canonization from the Chinese Jiaqing Emperor and received the title \"Qu\u1ed1c V\u01b0\u01a1ng\" (\u570b\u738b, \"King of a State)\" and the name of the country as \"Vi\u1ec7t Nam\" (\u8d8a\u5357) instead \"\u0110\u1ea1i Vi\u1ec7t\" (\u5927\u8d8a). To avoid unnecessary armed conflicts, the Vietnamese rulers accepted this in diplomatic relation and used the title Emperor only domestically. However, Vietnamese rulers never accepted the vassalage relationship with China and always refused to come to Chinese courts to pay homage to Chinese rulers (a sign of vassalage acceptance). China waged a number of wars against Vietnam throughout history, and after each failure, settled for the tributary relationship. The Yuan dynasty under Kublai Khan waged three wars against Vietnam to force it into a vassalage relationship but after successive failures, Kublai Khan's successor, Tem\u00fcr Khan, finally settled for a tributary relationship with Vietnam. Vietnam sent tributary missions to China once in three years (with some periods of disruptions) until the 19th century, Sino-French War France replaced China in control of northern Vietnam.\nThe emperors of the last dynasty of Vietnam continued to hold this title until the French conquered Vietnam. The emperor, however, was then a puppet figure only and could easily be disposed of by the French for more pro-France figure. Japan took Vietnam from France and the Axis-occupied Vietnam was declared an empire by the Japanese in March 1945. The line of emperors came to an end with B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i, who was deposed after the war, although he later served as head of state of South Vietnam from 1949 to 1955."}
{"id": "10113", "revid": "42056547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10113", "title": "Egalitarianism", "text": "Egalitarianism (), or equalitarianism, is a school of thought within political philosophy that builds on the concept of social equality, prioritizing it for all people. Egalitarian doctrines are generally characterized by the idea that all humans are equal in fundamental worth or moral status. As such, all people should be accorded equal rights and treatment under the law. Egalitarian doctrines have supported many modern social movements, including the Enlightenment, feminism, civil rights, and international human rights.\nOne key aspect of egalitarianism is its emphasis on equal opportunities for all individuals, regardless of their background or circumstances. This means ensuring that everyone has access to the same resources, education, and opportunities to succeed in life. By promoting equal opportunities, egalitarianism aims to level the playing field and reduce disparities that result from social inequalities.\nForms.\nSome specifically focused egalitarian concerns include communism, legal egalitarianism, luck egalitarianism, political egalitarianism, gender egalitarianism, racial equality, equality of opportunity, and Christian egalitarianism. Common forms of egalitarianism include political and philosophical.\nLegal egalitarianism.\nOne argument is that liberalism provides democratic societies with the means to carry out civic reform by providing a framework for developing public policy and providing the correct conditions for individuals to achieve civil rights. There are two major types of equality:\nEquality of person.\nThe English Bill of Rights of 1689 and the United States Constitution use only the term person in operative language involving fundamental rights and responsibilities, except for a reference to men in the English Bill of Rights regarding men on trial for treason; and a rule of proportional Congressional representation in the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution. \nAs the rest of the Constitution, in its operative language the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution uses the term person, stating that \"nor shall any State deprives any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws\".\nGender equality.\nThe motto \"\" was used during the French Revolution and is still used as an official motto of the French government. The 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen French Constitution is also framed with this basis in equal rights of humankind.\nThe Declaration of Independence of the United States is an example of an assertion of equality of men as \"All men are created equal\" and the wording of men and man is a reference to both men and women, i.e., mankind. John Locke is sometimes considered the founder of this form. Many state constitutions in the United States also use the rights of man language rather than rights of person since the noun man has always been a reference to and an inclusion of both men and women.\nThe Tunisian Constitution of 2014 provides that \"men and women shall be equal in their rights and duties\".\nFeminism is informed by egalitarian philosophy, being a gender-focused philosophy of equality. Feminism is distinguished from egalitarianism by also existing as a political and social movement.\nSocial egalitarianism.\nAt a cultural level, egalitarian theories have developed in sophistication and acceptance during the past two hundred years. Among the notable broadly egalitarian philosophies are socialism, communism, social anarchism, libertarian socialism, left-libertarianism, and progressivism, some of which propound economic egalitarianism. Anti-egalitarianism or elitism is opposition to egalitarianism.\nEconomic.\nAn early example of equality is what might be described as outcome economic egalitarianism is the Chinese philosophy of agriculturalism which held that the economic policies of a country need to be based upon egalitarian self-sufficiency.\nIn socialism, social ownership of means of production is sometimes considered to be a form of economic egalitarianism because in an economy characterized by social ownership the surplus product generated by industry would accrue to the population as a whole as opposed to a class of private owners, thereby granting each increased autonomy and greater equality in their relationships with one another. Although the economist Karl Marx is sometimes mistaken to be an egalitarian, Marx eschewed normative theorizing on moral principles altogether. Marx did have a theory of the evolution of moral principles concerning specific economic systems.\nThe American economist John Roemer has put forth a new perspective on equality and its relationship to socialism. Roemer attempts to reformulate Marxist analysis to accommodate normative principles of distributive justice, shifting the argument for socialism away from purely technical and materialist reasons to one of distributive justice. Roemer argues that according to the principle of distributive justice, the traditional definition of socialism is based on the principle that individual compensation is proportional to the value of the labor one expends in production (\"To each according to his contribution\") is inadequate. Roemer concludes that egalitarians must reject socialism as it is classically defined for equality to be realized.\nThe egalitarian management style focusses on the approach to democratize power, decision-making, and responsibility and distributed them more evenly among all members of a team or organization.\nEgalitarianism and non-human animals.\nMany philosophers, including Ingmar Persson, Peter Vallentyne, Nils Holtug, Catia Faria and Lewis Gompertz, have argued that egalitarianism implies that the interests of non-human animals must be taken into account as well. Philosopher Oscar Horta has further argued that egalitarianism implies rejecting speciesism, ceasing to exploit non-human animals and aiding animals suffering in nature. Furthermore, Horta argues that non-human animals should be prioritized since they are worse off than humans.\nReligious and spiritual egalitarianism.\nChristianity.\nIn 1957, Martin Luther King Jr. quoted Galatians 3:28 (\"There is neither Jew nor Greek, slave nor free, male nor female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus\") in a pamphlet opposing racial segregation in the United States. He wrote, \"Racial segregation is a blatant denial of the unity which we all have in Christ.\" He also alluded to that verse at the end of his 1963 \"I Have a Dream\" speech. The verse is cited to support an egalitarian interpretation of Christianity. According to Jakobus M. Vorster, the central question debated by theologians is whether the statement about ecclesiastical relationships can be translated into a Christian-ethical norm for all human relationships. Vorster argues that it can, and that the verse provides a Christian foundation for the promotion of human rights and equality, in contrast to \"patriarchy, racism and exploitation\" which in his opinion are caused by human sinfulness. Karin Neutel notes how some apply the philosophy of Paul's statement to include sexuality, health and race saying \"[The original] three pairs must have been as relevant in the first century, as the additional categories are today.\" She argues that the verse points to a utopian, cosmopolitan community.\nIslam.\nThe verse 49:13 of The Quran states: \"O mankind, indeed We have created you from male and female and made you peoples and tribes that you may know one another. Indeed, the noblest of you in the sight of Allah is the most righteous of you. Indeed, Allah is Knowing and Acquainted\". Muhammad echoed these egalitarian sentiments, sentiments that clashed with the practices of the pre-Islamic cultures. In a review of Louise Marlow's \"Hierarchy and Egalitarianism in Islamic Thought,\" Ismail Poonawala argues the desire for the Arab-Muslim Empire to consolidate power and administer the state rather led to the deemphasis of egalitarian teachings in the Qur'an and by the Prophet.\nModern egalitarianism theory.\nModern egalitarianism is a theory that rejects the classic definition of egalitarianism as a possible achievement economically, politically, and socially. Modern egalitarianism theory, or new egalitarianism, outlines that if everyone had the same opportunity cost, then there would be no comparative advances and no one would gain from trading with each other. In essence, the immense gains people receive from trading with each other arise because they are unequal in characteristics and talents\u2014these differences may be innate or developed so that people can gain from trading with each other.\nDiscussion.\nAlexander Berkman and Thompson et. al.\nThompson et al. theorize that any society consisting of only one perspective, be it egalitarianism, hierarchies, individualist, fatalist or autonomists will be inherently unstable as the claim is that an interplay between all these perspectives are required if each perspective is to be fulfilling. Although an individualist according to cultural theory is aversive towards both principles and groups, individualism is not fulfilling if individual brilliance cannot be recognized by groups, or if individual brilliance cannot be made permanent in the form of principles. Accordingly, they argue that egalitarians have no power except through their presence, unless they (by definition, reluctantly) embrace principles which enable them to cooperate with fatalists and hierarchies. They argue that this means they will also have no individual sense of direction without a group, which could be mitigated by following individuals outside their group, namely autonomists or individualists. Alexander Berkman suggests that \"equality does not mean an equal amount but equal opportunity. ... Do not make the mistake of identifying equality in liberty with the forced equality of the convict camp. True anarchist equality implies freedom, not quantity. It does not mean that everyone must eat, drink, or wear the same things, do the same work, or live in the same manner. Far from it: the very reverse. ... Individual needs and tastes differ, as appetites differ. It is an equal opportunity to satisfy them that constitutes true equality. ... Far from leveling, such equality opens the door for the greatest possible variety of activity and development. For human character is diverse.\"\nThe cultural theory of risk holds egalitarianism\u2014with fatalism termed as its opposite\u2014as defined by a negative attitude towards rules and principles; and a positive attitude towards group decision-making. The theory distinguishes between hierarchists, who are positive towards both rules and groups; and egalitarians, who are positive towards groups, but negative towards rules. This is by definition a form of anarchist equality as referred to by Berkman. Thus, the fabric of an egalitarian society is held together by cooperation and implicit peer pressure rather than by explicit rules and punishment.\nMarxism.\nKarl Marx and Friedrich Engels believed that an international proletarian revolution would bring about a socialist society which would then eventually give way to a communist stage of social development which would be a classless, stateless, moneyless, humane society erected on common ownership of the means of production and the principle of \"From each according to their ability, to each according to their needs\". Marxism rejected egalitarianism in the sense of greater equality between classes, clearly distinguishing it from the socialist notion of the abolition of classes based on the division between workers and owners of productive property.\nAllen Woods finds that Marx's view of classlessness was not the subordination of society to a universal interest such as a universal notion of equality, but it was about the creation of the conditions that would enable individuals to pursue their true interests and desires, making Marx's notion of communist society radically individualistic. Although his position is often confused or conflated with distributive egalitarianism in which only the goods and services resulting from production are distributed according to notional equality, Marx eschewed the entire concept of equality as abstract and bourgeois, preferring to focus on more concrete principles such as opposition to exploitation on materialist grounds and economic logic.\nMurray Rothbard.\nIn the title essay of his book \"Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays\", Murray Rothbard argued that egalitarian theory always results in a politics of statist control because it is founded on revolt against the ontological structure of reality itself. According to Rothbard, individuals are naturally unequal in their abilities, talents, and characteristics. He believed that this inequality was not only natural but necessary for a functioning society. In his view, people's unique qualities and abilities are what allow them to contribute to society in different ways.\nRothbard argued that egalitarianism was a misguided attempt to impose an artificial equality on individuals, which would ultimately lead to societal breakdown. He believed that attempts to force equality through government policies or other means would stifle individual freedom and prevent people from pursuing their own interests and passions. Furthermore, Rothbard believed that egalitarianism was rooted in envy and resentment towards those who were more successful or talented than others. He saw it as a destructive force that would lead to a culture of mediocrity, where people were discouraged from striving for excellence.\nEquity.\nThe Atlas movement defines equitism as the idea that all groups should have equal rights and benefits. The term has been used as the claimed philosophical basis of Telosa, a proposed utopia to be built in the United States by Marc Lore. Social equity is about equality of outcomes for each groups, while egalitarianism generally advocates for equality of opportunity, recognizing that a fair society should provide all members with the same opportunities while recognizing that different outcomes are expected due to human individuality."}
{"id": "10115", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10115", "title": "Expert witness", "text": "An expert witness, particularly in common law countries such as the United Kingdom, Australia, and the United States, is a person whose opinion by virtue of education, training, certification, skills or experience, is accepted by the judge as an expert. The judge may consider the witness's specialized (scientific, technical or other) opinion about evidence or about facts before the court within the expert's area of expertise, to be referred to as an \"expert opinion\". Expert witnesses may also deliver \"expert evidence\" within the area of their expertise. Their testimony may be rebutted by testimony from other experts or by other evidence or facts.\nHistory.\nThe forensic expert practice is an ancient profession. For example, in ancient Babylonia, midwives were used as experts in determining pregnancy, virginity and female fertility. Similarly, the Roman Empire recognized midwives, handwriting experts and land surveyors as legal experts. The codified use of expert witnesses and the admissibility of their testimony and scientific evidence has developed significantly in the Western court system over the last 250 years. The concept of allowing an expert witness to testify in a court setting and provide opinionated evidence on the facts of other witnesses was first introduced by Lord Mansfield in the case of \"Folkes v. Chadd\" in 1782. In this particular case, the court was hearing litigation regarding the silting of Wells Harbor in Norfolk and allowed leading civil engineer, John Smeaton, to provide scientific rationale behind the proposed legislation. The decision by the English Court to allow for an expert to provide contextual background and detail on a case is often cited as the root of modern rules on expert testimony.\nRole.\nExpert witnesses are called upon in the court system to serve as an objective party to the lawsuit and never function as an advocate for one side or the other. Expert witnesses are present in litigation to explain complicated scientific issues, not to influence the jury or judge with fervor. The main responsibilities of expert witnesses are to evaluate potential problems, defects, deficiencies, or errors only when able to fully appreciate a process or system. Expert witnesses are obligated to study the processes prior to making a survey or postpone the assignment prior to potentially missing the target due to lack of specific condition understanding. They are called to testify under the assumption that all the preparation required for a competent evaluation of the process has been made.\nTypically, experts are relied on for opinions on severity of injury, degree of sanity, cause of failure in a machine or other device, loss of earnings and associated benefits, care costs, and the like. In an intellectual property case an expert may be shown two music scores, book texts, or circuit boards and asked to ascertain their degree of similarity. In the majority of cases, the expert's personal relation to the defendant is considered and usually adjudged to be irrelevant.\nThe tribunal itself, or the judge, can in some systems call upon experts to technically evaluate a certain fact or action, in order to provide the court with a complete knowledge on the fact/action it is judging. The expertise has the legal value of an acquisition of data. The results of these experts are then compared to those by the experts of the parties.\nThe expert has a great responsibility, and especially in penal trials, and perjury by an expert is a severely punished crime in most countries. The use of expert witnesses is sometimes criticized in the United States because in civil trials, they are often used by both sides to advocate differing positions, and it is left up to a jury to decide which expert witness to believe. Although experts are legally prohibited from expressing their opinion of submitted evidence until after they are hired, sometimes a party can surmise beforehand, because of reputation or prior cases, that the testimony will be favorable regardless of any basis in the submitted data; such experts are commonly disparaged as \"hired guns.\"\nQualifications.\nAn expert witness at the time of trial is qualified by the court and must be re-qualified each time that person comes to trial for the offering of opinions. The qualification is given by each trial judge and takes place regardless of prior appearances by a particular expert witness. Expert witnesses are those whom the court has deemed qualified to speak on a topic to provide background to anyone on a lay jury.\nDuties in United States courts.\nIn high stakes cases multiple experts, in multiple topics, are often retained by each party. Although it is still relatively rare, the court itself may also retain its own independent expert. In all cases, fees paid to an expert may not be contingent on the outcome of the case.\nExpert evidence is often the most important component of many civil and criminal cases today. Fingerprint examination, blood analysis, DNA fingerprinting, and forensic firearm examination are common kinds of expert evidence heard in serious criminal cases. In civil cases, the work of accident analysis, forensic engineers, and forensic accountants is usually important, the latter to assess damages and costs in long and complex cases. Intellectual property and medical negligence cases are typical examples.\nElectronic evidence has also entered the courtroom as critical forensic evidence. Audio and video evidence must be authenticated by both parties in any litigation by a forensic expert who is also an expert witness who assists the court in understanding details about that electronic evidence.\nVoice-mail recordings and closed-circuit television systems produce electronic evidence often used in litigation, more so today than in the past. Video recordings of bank robberies and audio recordings of life threats are presented in court rooms by electronic expert witnesses.\nRules of evidence and code of procedure.\nHearsay rule.\nOne important rule that applies to the expert witness but not the percipient witness is the exception to the hearsay rule. A percipient witness tells only what he/she actually knows about a case and nothing more. Percipient witnesses cannot give opinions nor conjecture regarding a hypothetical set of conditions. Conversely, the court does allow an expert to testify about issues that may not be personally known by them. This allows the expert to rely upon scientific articles, discussions with colleagues on the subject, testimony read in preparation for testimony in the case and similar pieces of information not personally known to the expert.\nChain of custody.\nIt is important that expert witnesses who handle evidence maintain a proper chain of custody such that they are able to authenticate the evidence, prove that it is what they represent it to be, when testifying at trial. Most notably in the context of a criminal prosecution, an expert witness who evaluates or examines an item pertinent to an investigation or case evaluation may add an entry to a \"chain of custody\" document, a form that contains the item's description, the time and date of release for all prior custodians of the item, and the time and date of release to the witness.\nWeight of testimony.\nIn the case of an expert witness, the weight of his/her evidence depends heavily on the foundation support established prior to an opinion being given. Examples include educational background, review of scholarly works, field studies and trainings which all lead up to developing a foundation of knowledge for credibility of a testimony. Before trial, all experts must prepare a report summarizing their analysis and conclusions and share the report with all other parties. This allows other parties to effectively cross-examine the expert.\nTypes.\nTestifying experts.\nIf the witness needs to testify in court, the privilege is no longer protected. The expert witness's identity and nearly all documents used to prepare the testimony will become discoverable. Usually an experienced lawyer will advise the expert not to take notes on documents because all of the notes will be available to the other party.\nAn expert testifying in a United States federal court must satisfy the requirements of Fed. R. Evid. 702. Generally, under Rule 702, an expert is a person with \"scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge\" who can \"assist the trier of fact,\" which is typically a jury. A witness who is being offered as an expert must first establish his or her competency in the relevant field through an examination of his or her credentials. The opposing attorney is permitted to conduct a voir dire of the witness in order to challenge that witness' qualifications. If qualified by the court, then the expert may testify \"in the form of an opinion or otherwise\" so long as: \"(1) the testimony is based upon sufficient facts or data, (2) the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods, and (3) the witness has applied the principles and methods reliably to the facts of the case.\"\nAlthough experts can testify in any case in which their expertise is relevant, criminal cases are more likely to use forensic scientists or forensic psychologists, whereas civil cases, such as personal injury, may use forensic engineers, forensic accountants, employment consultants or care experts. Senior physicians \u2013 UK, Ireland, and Commonwealth consultants, U.S. attending physicians \u2013 are frequently used in both the civil and criminal courts.\nThe Federal Court of Australia has issued guidelines for experts appearing in Australian courts. This covers the format of the expert's written testimony as well as their behaviour in court. Similar procedures apply in non-court forums, such as the Australian Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission.\nEducating witness.\nThe educating witness teaches the fact-finder (jury or, in a bench trial, judge) about the underlying scientific theory and instrument implementing theory. This witness is an expert witness, called to elicit opinions that a theory is valid and the instruments involved are reliable. The witness must be qualified as an expert witness, which may require academic qualifications or specific training.\nReporting witness.\nCalled after teaching witness leaves stand. Usually the laboratory technician who personally conducted the test. Witness will describe both the test and the results. When describing test, will venture opinions that proper test procedures were used and that equipment was in good working order.\nNon-testifying experts.\nIn the U.S., a party may hire experts to help them evaluate a given case. For example, a car maker may hire an experienced mechanic to decide if its cars were built to specification. This kind of expert opinion will be protected from discovery by the opposing party. In other words, if the expert finds evidence against their client, the opposite party will not automatically gain access to it. This privilege is similar to the work-product doctrine (not to be confused with attorney\u2013client privilege).\nThe non-testifying expert can be present at the trial or hearing to aid the attorney in asking questions of other expert witnesses. Unlike a testifying expert, a non-testifying expert can be easily withdrawn from a case. It is also possible to change a non-testifying expert to a testifying expert before the expert disclosure date.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, under the Federal Rule of Evidence 702 (FRE), an expert witness must be qualified on the topic of testimony. In determining the qualifications of the expert, the FRE requires the expert have had specialized education, training, or practical experience in the subject matter relating to the case. The expert's testimony must be based on facts in evidence, and should offer opinion about the causation or correlation to the evidence in drawing a conclusion.\nExperts in the U.S. typically are paid on an hourly basis for their services in investigating the facts, preparing a report, and if necessary, testifying during pre-trial discovery, or at trial. Hourly fees range from approximately $200 to $750 or more per hour, varying primarily by the expert's field of expertise, and the individual expert's qualifications and reputation. In several fields, such as handwriting analysis, where the expert compares signatures to determine the likelihood of a forgery, and medical case reviews by a physician or nurse, in which the expert goes over hospital and medical records to assess the possibility of malpractice, experts often initially charge a flat fixed fee for their initial report. As with the hourly fees discussed previously, the amount of that flat fee varies considerably based on the reviewing expert's field, experience and reputation.\nIn 2017 Kootenai County, Idaho paid nearly $600,000 during the trial over the killing of a Coeur d'Alene police officer, with the public defenders paying approximately $311,000 for seven experts and the prosecutors paying $270,000 for three experts. A 2021 survey conducted by SEAK, Inc., a company that helps professionals serve as expert witnesses, revealed a median hourly rate of $500, $400, and $475 for testifying in court, case preparation, and deposition respectively. As for the highest amount ever billed for a single case, the median was $24,000 and the mean was just over $62,000.\nThe expert's professional fee, plus his or her related expenses, is generally paid by the party retaining the expert. In some circumstance the party who prevails in the litigation may be entitled to recover the amounts paid to its expert from the losing party.\nScientific evidence.\nIn law, scientific evidence is evidence derived from scientific knowledge or techniques. Most forensic evidence, including genetic evidence, is scientific evidence.\n\"Frye\" test.\nThe \"Frye\" test, coming from the case \"Frye v. United States\" (1923), said that admissible scientific evidence must be a result of a theory that had \"general acceptance\" in the scientific community. This test results in uniform decisions regarding admissibility. In particular, the judges in \"Frye\" ruled that:\nIn 1923, the case of Frye v. United States instituted significant change to both criminal and civil law by addressing the use of expert witness testimony in conjunction with scientific testimony. In Frye v. United States, the defense team attempted to introduce both the results of a polygraph test administered to Frye to determine Frye's innocence as well as the testimony of an expert witness to verify and explain the results.\nHowever, the court rejected the expert's testimony, ruling that: \"While courts will go a long way in admitting expert testimony deduced from a well-recognized scientific principle or discovery, the thing from which the deduction is made must be sufficiently established to have gained general acceptance in the particular field in which it belongs.\"\nThrough this ruling, the judge's opinion in Frye v. United States set precedent and the standard by which expert witnesses would be utilized in the court system for decades. In the federal courts, between 1948 and 1975, Frye was cited 55 times; however, the use and application was not consistent. One of the major struggles that came out of this precedent was the application to both civil and criminal cases. Many of the courts and judges had trouble interpreting the \"general acceptance\" notion of a particular field in a concise and non-arbitrary manner. In 2012, courts in nine states still used the \"Frye\" standard when analyzing state expert witness rules.\nThe Federal Rules of Evidence\nIn 1975, the United States Congress issued the Federal Rules of Evidence. FRE 702 was issued to provide a standard for expert witness testimony to be upheld by the United States court system. The rule specified that the application of expert witnesses had to be attributed to a person with \"scientific or technical knowledge,\" in conjunction with a list of qualifications that would quality one to be an expert in terms of \"knowledge, skill, experience, training or education\". This rule thus clarified the acceptable use of expert witnesses in both criminal and civil cases.\nHowever, FRE 702 still left some courts in confusion. The courts who would use this new rule were confused as to whether FRE 702 served to bolster the \"general acceptance\" ruling in Frye or if FRE 702 was the replacement of this rule. For instance, in \"U.S. v. Williams\" (1978), the Second Circuit responded that \"the applicable considerations [for expert witness testimony] are 'probativeness, materiality, and reliability of the evidence on the one side, and any tendency to mislead, prejudice or confuse the jury on the other.'\" The court appeared to reject the previous precedent set by \"Frye\". The rationale in the Williams case was later adopted by other federal courts, including the Third Circuit which adopted a \"reliability\" test in 1984. Meanwhile, other federal courts stuck to the \"Frye\" precedent, causing a circuit split which would not be solved until the Supreme Court set a new expert standard in \"Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc.\" (1993).\nDaubert standard.\nThe Daubert standard arose out of the U.S. Supreme Court case \"Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc.\" It provides four factors that courts ought to consider when determining whether expert testimony is admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence:\nIn 2012, twenty-two states used the \"Daubert\" test when analyzing their own expert witness rules.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEngland and Wales.\nIn England and Wales, under the Civil Procedure Rules (CPR), an expert witness is required to be independent and address his or her expert report to the court. A witness may be jointly instructed by both sides if the parties agree to this, especially in cases where the liability is relatively small.\nUnder the CPR, expert witnesses may be instructed to produce a joint statement detailing points of agreement and disagreement to assist the court or tribunal. The meeting is held quite independently of instructing lawyers, and often assists in resolution of a case, especially if the experts review and modify their opinions. When this happens, substantial trial costs can be saved when the parties to a dispute agree to a settlement. In most systems, the trial (or the procedure) can be suspended in order to allow the experts to study the case and produce their results. More frequently, meetings of experts occur before trial. Experts charge a professional fee which is paid by the party commissioning the report (both parties for joint instructions) although the report is addressed to the court. The fee must not be contingent on the outcome of the case. Expert witnesses may be subpoenaed (issued with a witness summons), although this is normally a formality to avoid court date clashes.\nScotland.\nIn Scots Law, \"Davie v Magistrates of Edinburgh\" (1953) provides authority that where a witness has particular knowledge or skills in an area being examined by the court, and has been called to court in order to elaborate on that area for the benefit of the court, that witness may give evidence of his/her opinion on that area.\nTurkey.\nDuring a Erdo\u011fan-Gollum comparison trial, a panel of expert witnesses had to decide on the character of Gollum."}
{"id": "10116", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10116", "title": "Endocytosis", "text": "Endocytosis is a cellular process in which substances are brought into the cell. The material to be internalized is surrounded by an area of cell membrane, which then buds off inside the cell to form a vesicle containing the ingested materials. Endocytosis includes pinocytosis (cell drinking) and phagocytosis (cell eating). It is a form of active transport.\nHistory.\nThe term was proposed by De Duve in 1963. Phagocytosis was discovered by \u00c9lie Metchnikoff in 1882.\nPathways.\nEndocytosis pathways can be subdivided into four categories: namely, receptor-mediated endocytosis (also known as clathrin-mediated endocytosis), caveolae, pinocytosis, and phagocytosis.\nMore recent experiments have suggested that these morphological descriptions of endocytic events may be inadequate, and a more appropriate method of classification may be based upon whether particular pathways are dependent on clathrin and dynamin.\nDynamin-dependent clathrin-independent pathways include FEME, UFE, ADBE, EGFR-NCE and IL2R\u03b2 uptake.\nDynamin-independent clathrin-independent pathways include the CLIC/GEEC pathway (regulated by Graf1), as well as MEND and macropinocytosis.\nClathrin-mediated endocytosis is the only pathway dependent on both clathrin and dynamin.\nPrincipal components.\nThe endocytic pathway of mammalian cells consists of distinct membrane compartments, which internalize molecules from the plasma membrane and recycle them back to the surface (as in early endosomes and recycling endosomes), or sort them to degradation (as in late endosomes and lysosomes). The principal components of the endocytic pathway are:\nIt was recently found that an eisosome serves as a portal of endocytosis in yeast.\nClathrin-mediated.\nThe major route for endocytosis in most cells, and the best-understood, is that mediated by the molecule clathrin. This large protein assists in the formation of a coated pit on the inner surface of the plasma membrane of the cell. This pit then buds into the cell to form a coated vesicle in the cytoplasm of the cell. In so doing, it brings into the cell not only a small area of the surface of the cell but also a small volume of fluid from outside the cell.\nCoats function to deform the donor membrane to produce a vesicle, and they also function in the selection of the vesicle cargo. Coat complexes that have been well characterized so far include coat protein-I (COP-I), COP-II, and clathrin. Clathrin coats are involved in two crucial transport steps: (i) receptor-mediated and fluid-phase endocytosis from the plasma membrane to early endosome and (ii) transport from the TGN to endosomes. In endocytosis, the clathrin coat is assembled on the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane, forming pits that invaginate to pinch off (scission) and become free CCVs. In cultured cells, the assembly of a CCV takes ~ 1min, and several hundred to a thousand or more can form every minute. The main scaffold component of clathrin coat is the 190-kD protein called clathrin heavy chain (CHC), which is associated with a 25- kD protein called clathrin light chain (CLC), forming three-legged trimers called triskelions.\nVesicles selectively concentrate and exclude certain proteins during formation and are not representative of the membrane as a whole. AP2 adaptors are multisubunit complexes that perform this function at the plasma membrane. The best-understood receptors that are found concentrated in coated vesicles of mammalian cells are the LDL receptor (which removes LDL from circulating blood), the transferrin receptor (which brings ferric ions bound by transferrin into the cell) and certain hormone receptors (such as that for EGF).\nAt any one moment, about 25% of the plasma membrane of a fibroblast is made up of coated pits. As a coated pit has a life of about a minute before it buds into the cell, a fibroblast takes up its surface by this route about once every 50 minutes. Coated vesicles formed from the plasma membrane have a diameter of about 100\u00a0nm and a lifetime measured in a few seconds. Once the coat has been shed, the remaining vesicle fuses with endosomes and proceeds down the endocytic pathway. The actual budding-in process, whereby a pit is converted to a vesicle, is carried out by clathrin; Assisted by a set of cytoplasmic proteins, which includes dynamin and adaptors such as adaptin.\nCoated pits and vesicles were first seen in thin sections of tissue in the electron microscope by Thomas F Roth and Keith R. Porter. The importance of them for the clearance of LDL from blood was discovered by Richard G. Anderson, Michael S. Brown and Joseph L. Goldstein in 1977. Coated vesicles were first purified by Barbara Pearse, who discovered the clathrin coat molecule in 1976.\nProcesses and components.\nCaveolin proteins like caveolin-1 (CAV1), caveolin-2 (CAV2), and caveolin-3 (CAV3), play significant roles in the caveolar formation process. More specifically, CAV1 and CAV2 are responsible for caveolae formation in non-muscle cells while CAV3 functions in muscle cells. The process starts with CAV1 being synthesized in the ER where it forms detergent-resistant oligomers. Then, these oligomers travel through the Golgi complex before arriving at the cell surface to aid in caveolar formation. Caveolae formation is also reversible through disassembly under certain conditions such as increased plasma membrane tension. These certain conditions then depend on the type of tissues that are expressing the caveolar function. For example, not all tissues that have caveolar proteins have a caveolar structure i.e. the blood-brain barrier.\nThough there are many morphological features conserved among caveolae, the functions of each CAV protein are diverse. One common feature among caveolins is their hydrophobic stretches of potential hairpin structures that are made of \u03b1-helices. The insertion of these hairpin-like \u03b1-helices forms a caveolae coat which leads to membrane curvature. In addition to insertion, caveolins are also capable of oligomerization which further plays a role in membrane curvature. Recent studies have also discovered that polymerase I, transcript release factor, and serum deprivation protein response also play a role in the assembly of caveolae. Besides caveolae assembly, researchers have also discovered that CAV1 proteins can also influence other endocytic pathways. When CAV1 binds to Cdc42, CAV1 inactivates it and regulates Cdc42 activity during membrane trafficking events.\nMechanisms.\nThe process of cell uptake depends on the tilt and chirality of constituent molecules to induce membrane budding. Since such chiral and tilted lipid molecules are likely to be in a \"raft\" form, researchers suggest that caveolae formation also follows this mechanism since caveolae are also enriched in raft constituents. When caveolin proteins bind to the inner leaflet via cholesterol, the membrane starts to bend, leading to spontaneous curvature. This effect is due to the force distribution generated when the caveolin oligomer binds to the membrane. The force distribution then alters the tension of the membrane which leads to budding and eventually vesicle formation."}
{"id": "10118", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10118", "title": "Ezra Abbot", "text": "Ezra Abbot (April 28, 1819, Jackson, MaineMarch 21, 1884, Cambridge, Massachusetts) was an American biblical scholar.\nLife and writings.\nAbbot was born at Jackson, Maine, April 28, 1819; son of Ezra and Phebe Abbot. He was educated at Phillips Exeter Academy and graduated from Bowdoin College in 1840. In 1847, at the request of Andrews Norton, he went to Cambridge, Massachusetts where he was principal of a public school until 1856. He was assistant librarian of Harvard University from 1856 to 1872, and planned and perfected an alphabetical card catalog, combining many of the advantages of the ordinary dictionary catalogs with the grouping of the minor topics under more general heads, which is characteristic of a systematic catalogue. From 1872 until his death he was Bussey Professor of New Testament Criticism and Interpretation in the Harvard Divinity School.\nAbbot's studies were chiefly in Southwest Asian languages and textual criticism of the New Testament, though his work as a bibliographer showed such results as the exhaustive list of writings (5300 in all) on the doctrine of the future life, appended to W. R. Alger's \"History of the Doctrine of a Future Life, as it has prevailed in all Nations and Ages\" (1862), and published separately in 1864.\nAbbot's publications, though always of the most thorough and scholarly character, were to a large extent dispersed in the pages of reviews, dictionaries, concordances, texts edited by others, Unitarian controversial treatises, etc. However, he took a more conspicuous and personal part in the preparation (with Baptist scholar Horatio Balch Hackett) of the enlarged American edition of Dr. (afterwards Sir) William Smith's \"Dictionary of the Bible\" (1867\u20131870), to which he contributed more than 400 articles, as well as greatly improving the bibliographical completeness of the work. He was an efficient member of the American revision committee for the Revised Version (1881\u20131885) of the King James Bible, and helped prepare Caspar Ren\u00e9 Gregory's Prolegomena to the revised Greek New Testament of Constantin von Tischendorf.\nHe was one of the 32 founding members of the Society of Biblical Literature in 1880.\nHis principal single work, representing his scholarly method and conservative conclusions, was \"The Authorship of the Fourth Gospel: External Evidences\" (1880; 2nd ed. by J. H. Thayer, with other essays, 1889), originally a lecture. In spite of the compression due to its form, this work was up to that time probably the ablest defense, based on external evidence, of the Johannine authorship, and certainly the most complete treatment of the relation of Justin Martyr to this gospel.\nHonors.\nAbbot was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1861. Though a layman, he received the degree of S.T.D. from Harvard in 1872, and that of D.D. from Edinburgh in 1884.\nReferences.\nAttribution"}
{"id": "10119", "revid": "36135308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10119", "title": "Edwin Abbott Abbott", "text": "Edwin Abbott Abbott (20 December 1838\u00a0\u2013 12 October 1926) was an English schoolmaster, theologian, and Anglican priest, best known as the author of the novella \"Flatland\" (1884).\nBiography.\nEdwin Abbott Abbott was the eldest son of Edwin Abbott (1808\u20131882), headmaster of the Philological School, Marylebone, and his wife, Jane Abbott (1806\u20131882). His parents were first cousins.\nHe was born in London and educated at the City of London School and at St John's College, Cambridge, where he took the highest honours of his class in classics, mathematics and theology, and became a fellow of his college. In particular, he was 1st Smith's prizeman in 1861. In 1862 he took orders. After holding masterships at King Edward's School, Birmingham, he succeeded G. F. Mortimer as headmaster of the City of London School in 1865, at the early age of 26. There, he oversaw the education of future Prime Minister H. H. Asquith. Abbott was Hulsean lecturer in 1876.\nHe retired in 1889, and devoted himself to literary and theological pursuits. Abbott's open-minded inclinations in theology were prominent both in his educational views and in his books. His \"Shakespearian Grammar\" (1870) is a permanent contribution to English philology. In 1885, he published a life of Francis Bacon. His theological writings include three anonymously published religious romances \u2013 \"Philochristus\" (1878), where he tried to raise interest in Gospels reading, \"Onesimus\" (1882), and \"Silanus the Christian\" (1908).\nMore weighty contributions are the anonymous theological discussion \"\" (1886), \"Philomythus\" (1891), his book \"The Anglican Career of Cardinal Newman\" (1892), and his article \"The Gospels\" in the ninth edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", embodying a critical view which caused considerable stir in the English theological world. He also wrote \"St Thomas of Canterbury, His Death and Miracles\" (1898), \"Johannine Vocabulary\" (1905), and \"Johannine Grammar\" (1906).\nAbbott also wrote educational textbooks, one being \"Via Latina: A First Latin Book\" which was published in 1880 and distributed around the world within the education system.\n\"Flatland\".\nAbbott's best-known work is his 1884 novella \"Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions\" which describes a two-dimensional world and explores the nature of dimensions. It has often been categorized as science fiction although it could more precisely be called \"mathematical fiction\".\nWith the advent of modern science fiction from the 1950s to the present day, \"Flatland\" has seen a revival in popularity, especially among science fiction and cyberpunk fans. Many works have been inspired by the novella, including novel sequels and short films."}
{"id": "10120", "revid": "29738728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10120", "title": "Emma Abbott", "text": "Emma Abbott (December 9, 1850 \u2013 January 5, 1891) was an American operatic soprano and impresario known for her pure, clear voice of great flexibility and volume.\nEarly life.\nEmma Abbott was born in 1850 in Chicago, Illinois, the daughter of the struggling Chicago musician Seth Abbott and his wife, Almira (n\u00e9e Palmer). As a child, she and her brother George studied singing, piano, guitar and violin with their father.\nThe family moved to Peoria, Illinois, Emma was eight years of age when, she made her first appearance on the stage, singing at a concert given in her father's office in Peoria. In 1854, Professor Abbott was unable to find a sufficient number of music students to make ends meet and the family suffered from financial problems. To help out, she and George began performing professionally when Emma was nine years old. She made her debut as a guitar player and singer in Peoria, Illinois in 1859, with George on the violin, and was teaching guitar by age thirteen.\nCareer.\nIn 1866, she joined an itinerant concert troupe and toured the country. While performing on the road she met and was befriended by Clara Louise Kellogg. Upon hearing Abbott in a concert in Toledo, Kellogg made it a point to meet her and encourage her to pursue an opera career and gave her a letter of introduction. Consequently, Abbott studied in New York City under Achille Errani, and made her concert d\u00e9but there in December 1871.\nIn 1872, Abbott went abroad to study with Antonio Sangiovanni in Milan. This was followed by further studies with Mathilde Marchesi, Pierre Fran\u00e7ois Wartel and Enrico Delle Sedie in Paris. She appeared in several productions in Paris, earning rave reviews for her fine soprano voice. She was awarded a contract with the Royal Opera in London and made her d\u00e9but at Covent Garden as Marie in \"La Fille du r\u00e9giment\" in 1876. However, her contract was cancelled shortly thereafter when she refused to sing Violetta from Verdi's \"La Traviata\" on moral grounds. That same year she secretly married Eugene Wetherell (d. 1889) and they returned to the United States, where she remained for the rest of her life.\nAbbott English Opera Company.\nOn February 23, 1877, Abbott made her American operatic d\u00e9but in New York, once again portraying Marie. In 1878 she and her husband Eugene Wetherell, organized an opera company known by her name (the Emma Abbott Grand English Opera Company), which toured extensively throughout the United States. It was the first opera company formed by a woman in the United States. Her husband ran the business end of the company and she managed the artistic side, often starring in the productions.\nThe company garnered a reputation among the public for quality productions and was quite successful. Among the notable roles that Abbott sang with the company are Juliette in Gounod's \"Rom\u00e9o et Juliette\", Virginia in \"Paul et Virginie\", Josephine in \"H.M.S. Pinafore\", the title role in Flotow's \"Martha\", Amina in Bellini's \"La Sonnambula\", and Violetta in \"La Traviata\", a role to which she apparently no longer objected, however, instead of singing \"Addio del passato\", she made Violetta expire with \"Nearer, my God, to Thee\".\nThroughout her career, she retained artistic control over her troupe, which sometimes numbered 60. Although the company's repertoire included works from the French, Italian and English operatic literatures, they always performed in English. Many of the works were abridged and interpolated songs were commonplace. For this reason the company and Abbott were not popular with many music critics who were unhappy with the changes to the standard repertoire. However, the company was incredibly popular with the public and was consistently financially successful. Abbott herself became known among Americans as 'the people's prima donna'.\nDeath.\nAbbott continued performing up until her sudden death from pneumonia in Salt Lake City, Utah in 1891, aged 40. She is buried at Oak Grove Cemetery in Gloucester, Massachusetts along with her husband."}
{"id": "10121", "revid": "22831189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10121", "title": "Epimetheus (disambiguation)", "text": "Epimetheus was a Titan in Greek mythology.\nEpimetheus may also refer to:"}
{"id": "10125", "revid": "31541467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10125", "title": "Emperor Sh\u014dmu", "text": " was the 45th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Sh\u014dmu's reign spanned the years 724 through 749, during the Nara period.\nTraditional narrative.\nBefore his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (\"imina\") is not clearly known, but he was known as Oshi-hiraki Toyosakura-hiko-no-mikoto.\nSh\u014dmu was the son of Emperor Monmu and Fujiwara no Miyako, a daughter of Fujiwara no Fuhito.\nSh\u014dmu had five consorts and six Imperial sons and daughters.\nEvents of Sh\u014dmu's reign.\nSh\u014dmu was still a child at the time of his father's death; thus, his grandmother, Empress Gemmei, and aunt, Empress Gensho, occupied the throne before he acceded.\nSh\u014dmu continued to reside in the Hezei Palace.\nSh\u014dmu is known as the first emperor whose consort was not born into the imperial household. His consort K\u014dmy\u014d was a non-royal Fujiwara commoner. A ritsury\u014d office was created for the queen-consort, the \"Kogogushiki\"; and this bureaucratic innovation continued into the Heian period.\nEmperor Sh\u014dmu's tour to the eastern provinces.\nWhile battle maneuvers of the Fujiwara no Hirotsugu Rebellion were still underway, in Tenpy\u014d 12 10th month (November, 740) Emperor Sh\u014dmu left the capital at Heij\u014d-ky\u014d (Nara) and traveled eastward via Horikoshi (\u5800\u8d8a\u9813\u5bae; today Tsuge; 10th month, 29th day: November 22), Nabari (10th month, 30th day: November 23), Ao (\u5b89\u4fdd\u9813\u5bae; today Aoyama ; 11th month 1st day: November 24) to Kawaguchi in Ichishi District, Ise Province (today part of Tsu, formerly part of Hakusan) where he retreated together with his court to a temporary palace. One of his generals was left in command of the capital. Presumably Sh\u014dmu feared Fujiwara supporters in Nara and was hoping to quell potential uprisings in other parts of the country with his presence. After four days travelling through heavy rain and thick mud, the party reached Kawaguchi on Tenpy\u014d 12 11th month, 2nd day (25 November, 740) A couple of days later, they learn of Hirotsugu's execution and that the rebellion had been quelled.\nDespite the good news, Sh\u014dmu did not return to Heij\u014d-ky\u014d immediately, but stayed in Kawaguchi until Tenpy\u014d 12 11th month, 11th day (4 December, 740). He continued his journey east, then north via Mino Province and back west along the shores of Lake Biwa to Kuni in Yamashiro Province (today in Kizugawa) which he reached on Tenpy\u014d 12 12th month, 15th day (6 January, 741). Places passed along the way included Akasaka (\u8d64\u5742\u9813\u5bae; today Suzuka; 11th m. 14th d.: Dec 7\uff09, Asake district (\u671d\u660e\u90e1; today Yokkaichi; 11th m. 20th d.: Dec 13\uff09, Ishiura (\u77f3\u5360\u9813\u5bae; today Tado; 11th m. 25th d.: Dec 18\uff09, Tagi district (\u5f53\u4f0e\u90e1; today Y\u014dr\u014d; 11th m. 26th d.: Dec 19\uff09, Fuwa (\u4e0d\u7834\u9813\u5bae; today Tarui; 12th m. 1st d.: Dec 23\uff09, Yokokawa (\u6a2a\u5ddd\u9813\u5bae; today Sant\u014d or Maihara; 12th m. 6th d.: Dec 28), Inukami (\u72ac\u4e0a\u9813\u5bae; today Hikone; 12th m. 7th d.: Dec 29\uff09, Gam\u014d district (\u84b2\u751f\u90e1; today near Y\u014dkaichi; 12th m. 9th d.: Dec 31\uff09, Yasu (\u91ce\u6d32\u9813\u5bae; today Yasu or Moriyama; 12th m. 10th d.: Jan 1\uff09, Awazu (\u79be\u6d25\u9813\u5bae; today \u014ctsu; 12th m. 11th d.\uff1a Jan 2\uff09, Tamanoi (\u7389\u4e95\u9813\u5bae; today Yamashina-ku, Kyoto; 12th m. 14th d.\uff09. Situated among the hills and near a river north of Nara, Kuni was easily defensible. In addition, the area was linked with the Minister of the Right, Tachibana no Moroe, while Nara was a center of the Fujiwara clan. On Tenpy\u014d 12 12th month, 15 day (6 January, 741) Sh\u014dmu proclaimed a new capital at Kuni-ky\u014d.\nLegacy.\nSh\u014dmu, a devout Buddhist, is best remembered for commissioning, in 743, the sixteen-meter high statue of the Vairocana Buddha (the \"Daibutsu\") in T\u014ddai-ji of Nara. At the time, this was such a massive undertaking that later chroniclers accuse him of having completely exhausted the country's reserves of bronze and precious metals. In 752, the Sh\u014dmu held the Eye-opening Ceremony of the Great Buddha.\nEarlier in 741, he established the system of provincial temples, making this the closest anyone ever came to declaring Japan a Buddhist nation. In addition he commissioned the observance of the ohigan holiday for both spring and autumnal equinox.\nEmperor Sh\u014dmu died at age 56.\nThe actual site of Sh\u014dmu's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Nara.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Sh\u014dmu's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Sahoyama no minami no misasagi\". The tomb site can be visited today in Horenji-cho, Tenri City near Nara City. The Imperial tomb of Sh\u014dmu's consort, Empress K\u014dmy\u014d, is located nearby.\nSh\u014ds\u014din.\nThe Sh\u014ds\u014d-in (\u6b63\u5009\u9662) is the treasure house of T\u014ddai-ji Temple in Nara, Japan.\nIt houses about 9.000 artifacts connected to Emperor Sh\u014dmu (701\u2013756) and Empress K\u014dmy\u014d (701\u2013760), as well as arts and crafts of the Tempy\u014d era of Japanese history.\nIts general importance derives from the fact, that it may be called an ark of Tang dynasty period cultural relics from Japan as well as from the continent: furniture, games, music instruments, clothing/accessories, weaponry, buddhist objects and pieces of writing.\nSee main entry.\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Sh\u014dmu's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nEras of Sh\u014dmu's life.\nThe years of Sh\u014dmu's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10126", "revid": "34632768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10126", "title": "Emperor Kanmu", "text": ", or Kammu, was the 50th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Kammu reigned from 781 to 806, and it was during his reign that the scope of the emperor's powers reached its peak. His reign saw the transition from the Nara period to the Heian period.\nTraditional narrative.\nKammu's personal name (\"imina\") was . He was the eldest son of Prince Shirakabe (later known as Emperor K\u014dnin), and was born prior to Shirakabe's ascension to the throne. According to the , Yamabe's mother, Yamato no Niigasa (later called Takano no Niigasa), was a 10th generation descendant of Muryeong of Baekje (462\u2013523).\nAfter his father became emperor, Kammu's half-brother, Prince Osabe was appointed to the rank of crown prince. His mother was Princess Inoe, a daughter of Emperor Sh\u014dmu; but instead of Osabe, it was Kammu who was later named to succeed their father. After Inoe and Prince Osabe were confined and then died in 775, Osabe's sister \u2013 Kammu's half-sister Princess Sakahito \u2013 became Kammu's wife. Later, when he ascended to the throne in 781, Kammu appointed his young brother, Prince Sawara, whose mother was Takano no Niigasa, as crown prince. Hikami no Kawatsugu, a son of Emperor Tenmu's grandson Prince Shioyaki and Sh\u014dmu's daughter Fuwa, attempted to carry out a coup d'\u00e9tat in 782, but it failed and Kawatsugu and his mother were sent into exile. In 785 Sawara was expelled and died in exile.\nThe Nara period saw the appointment of the first \"sh\u014dgun\", \u014ctomo no Otomaro by Emperor Kammu in 794 CE. The sh\u014dgun was the military dictator of Japan with near absolute power over territories via the military. Otomaro was declared \"Sei-i Taish\u014dgun\" which means \"Barbarian-subduing Great General\". Emperor Kammu granted the second title of sh\u014dgun to Sakanoue no Tamuramaro for subduing the Emishi in northern Honshu.\nKammu had 16 empresses and consorts, and 32 imperial sons and daughters. Among them, three sons would eventually ascend to the imperial throne: Emperor Heizei, Emperor Saga and Emperor Junna. Some of his descendants (known as the \"Kammu Taira\" or \"Kammu Heishi\") took the Taira hereditary clan title, and in later generations became prominent warriors. Examples include Taira no Masakado, Taira no Kiyomori, and (with a further surname expansion) the H\u014dj\u014d clan. The \"waka\" poet Ariwara no Narihira was one of his grandsons.\nKammu is traditionally venerated at his tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, as the location of Kammu's mausoleum.\nEvents of Kammu's life.\nKammu was an active emperor who attempted to consolidate government hierarchies and functions. Kammu appointed Sakanoue no Tamuramaro (758\u2013811) to lead a military expedition against the Emishi.\nEras of Kammu's reign.\nThe years of Kammu's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name (\"neng\u014d\").\nPolitics.\nEarlier Imperial sponsorship of Buddhism, beginning with Prince Sh\u014dtoku (574\u2013622), had led to a general politicization of the clergy, along with an increase in intrigue and corruption. In 784 Kammu shifted his capital from Nara to Nagaoka-ky\u014d in a move that was said to be designed to encumber the powerful Nara Buddhist establishments out of state politics\u2014while the capital moved, the major Buddhist temples, and their officials, stayed put. Indeed, there was a steady stream of edicts issued from 771 right through the period of K\u016bkai's studies which, for instance, sought to limit the number of Buddhist priests, and the building of temples. However, the move was to prove disastrous and was followed by a series of natural disasters including the flooding of half the city. In 785 the principal architect of the new capital, and royal favourite, Fujiwara no Tanetsugu, was assassinated.\nMeanwhile, Kammu's armies were pushing back the boundaries of his empire. This led to an uprising, and in 789 a substantial defeat for Kammu's troops. Also in 789 there was a severe drought and famine\u2014the streets of the capital were clogged with the sick, and people avoiding being drafted into the military, or into forced labour. Many disguised themselves as Buddhist priests for the same reason. Consequently, in 792 Kammu abolished national conscription, replacing it with a system wherein each province formed a militia from the local gentry, however this system vitiated the authority of the Emperor and led to proliferation of private armies. Then in 794 Kammu suddenly shifted the capital again, this time to Heian-ky\u014d, which is modern day Kyoto. The new capital was started early the previous year, but the change was abrupt and led to even more confusion amongst the populace. Kammu's rule witnessed the frontiers of Japan expanding into Izawa and Shiba, under the command of a preeminent commander, Tamura Maro.\nPolitically Kammu shored up his rule by changing the syllabus of the university. Confucian ideology still provided the \"raison d'\u00eatre\" for the Imperial government. In 784 Kammu authorised the teaching of a new course based on the \"Spring and Autumn Annals\" based on two newly imported commentaries: \"Kung-yang\" and \"Ku-liang\". These commentaries used political rhetoric to promote a state in which the Emperor, as \"Son of Heaven,\" should extend his sphere of influence to barbarous lands, thereby gladdening the people. In 798 the two commentaries became required reading at the government university.\nKammu also sponsored the travels of the monks Saich\u014d and K\u016bkai to China, from where they returned to found the Japanese branches of, respectively, Tendai and Shingon Buddhism.\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Kammu's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nWhen the daughter of a \"ch\u016bnagon\" became the favored consort of the Crown Prince Ate (later known as Heizei\"-tenn\u014d\"), her father's power and position in court was affected. Kammu disapproved of Fujiwara no Kusuko, daughter of Fujiwara no Tanetsugu; and Kammu had her removed from his son's household.\nConsorts and children.\nEmperor Kammu's Imperial family included 36 children.\nLegacy.\nIn 2001, Japan's emperor Akihito told reporters \"I, on my part, feel a certain kinship with Korea\", given the fact that it is recorded in the \"Chronicles of Japan\" that the Emperor Kammu's mother was one of the descendant of King Muryong of Baekje (462\u2013523). It was the first time that a Japanese emperor publicly referred to any Korean ancestry in the imperial line. According to the \"Shoku Nihongi\", Emperor Kammu's mother, Takano no Niigasa (720\u201390), is a descendant of Prince Junda, son of Muryeong, who died in Japan in 513 (\"Nihon Shoki\", Chapter 17).\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10127", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10127", "title": "Empress Shotoku of Japan", "text": ""}
{"id": "10128", "revid": "33462731", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10128", "title": "Elizabeth I", "text": "Elizabeth I (7 September 153324 March 1603) was Queen of England and Ireland from 17 November 1558 until her death in 1603. She was the last and longest reigning monarch of the House of Tudor. Her eventful reign, and its effect on history and culture, gave name to the Elizabethan era.\nElizabeth was the only surviving child of Henry VIII and his second wife, Anne Boleyn. When Elizabeth was two years old, her parents' marriage was annulled, her mother was executed, and Elizabeth was declared illegitimate. Henry restored her to the line of succession when she was 10, via the Third Succession Act 1543. After Henry's death in 1547, Elizabeth's younger half-brother Edward VI ruled until his own death in 1553, bequeathing the crown to a Protestant cousin, Lady Jane Grey, and ignoring the claims of his two half-sisters, the Catholic Mary and the younger Elizabeth, in spite of statutes to the contrary. Edward's will was set aside within weeks of his death and Mary became queen, deposing and executing Jane. During Mary's reign, Elizabeth was imprisoned for nearly a year on suspicion of supporting Protestant rebels.\nUpon her half-sister's death in 1558, Elizabeth succeeded to the throne and set out to rule by good counsel. She depended heavily on a group of trusted advisers led by William Cecil, whom she created Baron Burghley. One of her first actions as queen was the establishment of an English Protestant church, of which she became the supreme governor. This era, later named the Elizabethan Religious Settlement, would evolve into the Church of England. It was expected that Elizabeth would marry and produce an heir; however, despite numerous courtships, she never did. Because of this she is sometimes referred to as the \"Virgin Queen\". She was eventually succeeded by her first cousin twice removed, James VI of Scotland, the son of Mary, Queen of Scots.\nIn government, Elizabeth was more moderate than her father and siblings had been. One of her mottoes was (\"I see and keep silent\"). In religion, she was relatively tolerant and avoided systematic persecution. After the pope declared her illegitimate in 1570, which in theory released English Catholics from allegiance to her, several conspiracies threatened her life, all of which were defeated with the help of her ministers' secret service, run by Sir Francis Walsingham. Elizabeth was cautious in foreign affairs, manoeuvring between the major powers of France and Spain. She half-heartedly supported a number of ineffective, poorly resourced military campaigns in the Netherlands, France, and Ireland. By the mid-1580s, England could no longer avoid war with Spain.\nAs she grew older, Elizabeth became celebrated for her virginity. A cult of personality grew around her which was celebrated in the portraits, pageants, and literature of the day. The Elizabethan era is famous for the flourishing of English drama, led by playwrights such as William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe, the prowess of English maritime adventurers, such as Francis Drake and Walter Raleigh, and for the defeat of the Spanish Armada. Some historians depict Elizabeth as a short-tempered, sometimes indecisive ruler, who enjoyed more than her fair share of luck. Towards the end of her reign, a series of economic and military problems weakened her popularity. Elizabeth is acknowledged as a charismatic performer (\"Gloriana\") and a dogged survivor (\"Good Queen Bess\") in an era when government was ramshackle and limited, and when monarchs in neighbouring countries faced internal problems that jeopardised their thrones. After the short, disastrous reigns of her half-siblings, her 44 years on the throne provided welcome stability for the kingdom and helped to forge a sense of national identity.\nEarly life.\nElizabeth was born at Greenwich Palace on 7 September 1533 and was named after her grandmothers, Elizabeth of York and Lady Elizabeth Howard. She was the second child of Henry VIII of England born in wedlock to survive infancy. Her mother was Henry VIII's second wife, Anne Boleyn. At birth, Elizabeth was the heir presumptive to the English throne. Her elder half-sister Mary had lost her position as a legitimate heir when Henry annulled his marriage to Mary's mother, Catherine of Aragon, to marry Anne, with the intent to sire a male heir and ensure the Tudor succession. She was baptised on 10 September 1533, and her godparents were Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury; Henry Courtenay, Marquess of Exeter; Elizabeth Stafford, Duchess of Norfolk; and Margaret Wotton, Dowager Marchioness of Dorset. A canopy was carried at the ceremony over the infant by her uncle George Boleyn, Viscount Rochford; John Hussey, Baron Hussey of Sleaford; Lord Thomas Howard; and William Howard, Baron Howard of Effingham.\nElizabeth was two years and eight months old when her mother was beheaded on 19 May 1536, four months after Catherine of Aragon's death from natural causes. Elizabeth was declared illegitimate and deprived of her place in the royal succession. Eleven days after Anne Boleyn's execution, Henry married Jane Seymour. Queen Jane died the next year shortly after the birth of their son, Edward, who was the undisputed heir apparent to the throne. Elizabeth was placed in her half-brother's household and carried the chrisom, or baptismal cloth, at his christening.\nElizabeth's first governess, Margaret Bryan, wrote that she was \"as toward a child and as gentle of conditions as ever I knew any in my life\". Catherine Champernowne, better known by her later, married name of Catherine \"Kat\" Ashley, was appointed as Elizabeth's governess in 1537, and she remained Elizabeth's friend until her death in 1565. Champernowne taught Elizabeth four languages: French, Dutch, Italian, and Spanish. By the time William Grindal became her tutor in 1544, Elizabeth could write English, Latin, and Italian. Under Grindal, a talented and skilful tutor, she also progressed in French and Greek. By the age of 12, she was able to translate her stepmother Catherine Parr's religious work \"Prayers or Meditations\" from English into Italian, Latin, and French, which she presented to her father as a New Year's gift. From her teenage years and throughout her life, she translated works in Latin and Greek by numerous classical authors, including the \"Pro Marcello\" of Cicero, the \"De consolatione philosophiae\" of Boethius, a treatise by Plutarch, and the \"Annals\" of Tacitus. A translation of Tacitus from Lambeth Palace Library, one of only four surviving English translations from the early modern era, was confirmed as Elizabeth's own in 2019, after a detailed analysis of the handwriting and paper was undertaken.\nAfter Grindal died in 1548, Elizabeth received her education under her brother Edward's tutor, Roger Ascham, a sympathetic teacher who believed that learning should be engaging. Current knowledge of Elizabeth's schooling and precocity comes largely from Ascham's memoirs. By the time her formal education ended in 1550, Elizabeth was one of the best educated women of her generation. At the end of her life, she was believed to speak the Welsh, Cornish, Scottish, and Irish languages in addition to those mentioned above. The Venetian ambassador stated in 1603 that she \"possessed [these] languages so thoroughly that each appeared to be her native tongue\". Historian Mark Stoyle suggests that she was probably taught Cornish by William Killigrew, Groom of the Privy Chamber and later Chamberlain of the Exchequer.\nThomas Seymour.\nHenry VIII died in 1547 and Elizabeth's half-brother, Edward VI, became king at the age of nine. Catherine Parr, Henry's widow, soon married Thomas Seymour, Baron Seymour of Sudeley, Edward VI's uncle and the brother of Lord Protector Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset. The couple took Elizabeth into their household at Chelsea. There Elizabeth experienced an emotional crisis that some historians believe affected her for the rest of her life. Thomas Seymour engaged in romps and horseplay with the 14-year-old Elizabeth, including entering her bedroom in his nightgown, tickling her, and slapping her on the buttocks. Elizabeth rose early and surrounded herself with maids to avoid his unwelcome morning visits. Parr, rather than confront her husband over his inappropriate activities, joined in. Twice she accompanied him in tickling Elizabeth, and once held her while he cut her black gown \"into a thousand pieces\". However, after Parr discovered the pair in an embrace, she ended this state of affairs. In May 1548, Elizabeth was sent away.\nThomas Seymour nevertheless continued scheming to control the royal family and tried to have himself appointed the governor of the King's person. When Parr died after childbirth on 5 September 1548, he renewed his attentions towards Elizabeth, intent on marrying her. Her governess Kat Ashley, who was fond of Seymour, sought to convince Elizabeth to take him as her husband. She tried to convince Elizabeth to write to Seymour and \"comfort him in his sorrow\", but Elizabeth claimed that Thomas was not so saddened by her stepmother's death as to need comfort.\nIn January 1549, Seymour was arrested and imprisoned in the Tower on suspicion of conspiring to depose his brother Somerset as Protector, marry Lady Jane Grey to King Edward VI, and take Elizabeth as his own wife. Elizabeth, living at Hatfield House, would admit nothing. Her stubbornness exasperated her interrogator, Robert Tyrwhitt, who reported, \"I do see it in her face that she is guilty\". Seymour was beheaded on 20 March 1549.\nReign of Mary I.\nEdward VI died on 6 July 1553, aged 15. His will ignored the Succession to the Crown Act 1543, excluded both Mary and Elizabeth from the succession, and instead declared as his heir Lady Jane Grey, granddaughter of Henry VIII's younger sister Mary Tudor, Queen of France. Jane was proclaimed queen by the privy council, but her support quickly crumbled, and she was deposed after nine days. On 3 August 1553, Mary rode triumphantly into London, with Elizabeth at her side.\nThe show of solidarity between the sisters did not last long. Mary, a devout Catholic, was determined to crush the Protestant faith in which Elizabeth had been educated, and she ordered that everyone attend Catholic Mass; Elizabeth had to outwardly conform. Mary's initial popularity ebbed away in 1554 when she announced plans to marry Philip of Spain, the son of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V and an active Catholic. Discontent spread rapidly through the country, and many looked to Elizabeth as a focus for their opposition to Mary's religious policies.\nIn January and February 1554, Wyatt's rebellion broke out; it was soon suppressed. Elizabeth was brought to court and interrogated regarding her role, and on 18 March, she was imprisoned in the Tower of London. Elizabeth fervently protested her innocence. Though it is unlikely that she had plotted with the rebels, some of them were known to have approached her. Mary's closest confidant, Emperor Charles's ambassador Simon Renard, argued that her throne would never be safe while Elizabeth lived; and Lord Chancellor Stephen Gardiner, worked to have Elizabeth put on trial. Elizabeth's supporters in the government, including William Paget, 1st Baron Paget, convinced Mary to spare her sister in the absence of hard evidence against her. Instead, on 22 May, Elizabeth was moved from the Tower to Woodstock Palace, where she was to spend almost a year under house arrest in the charge of Henry Bedingfeld. Crowds cheered her all along the way.\nOn 17 April 1555, Elizabeth was recalled to court to attend the final stages of Mary's apparent pregnancy. If Mary and her child died, Elizabeth would become queen, but if Mary gave birth to a healthy child, Elizabeth's chances of becoming queen would recede sharply. When it became clear that Mary was not pregnant, no one believed any longer that she could have a child. Elizabeth's succession seemed assured.\nKing Philip, who ascended the Spanish throne in 1556, acknowledged the new political reality and cultivated his sister-in-law. She was a better ally than the chief alternative, Mary, Queen of Scots, who had grown up in France and was betrothed to Francis, Dauphin of France. When his wife fell ill in 1558, Philip sent the Count of Feria to consult with Elizabeth. This interview was conducted at Hatfield House, where she had returned to live in October 1555. By October 1558, Elizabeth was already making plans for her government. Mary recognised Elizabeth as her heir on 6 November 1558, and Elizabeth became queen when Mary died on 17 November.\nAccession.\nElizabeth became queen at the age of 25, and declared her intentions to her council and other peers who had come to Hatfield to swear allegiance. The speech contains the first record of her adoption of the medieval political theology of the sovereign's \"two bodies\": the body natural and the body politic:\nAs her triumphal progress wound through the city on the eve of the coronation ceremony, she was welcomed wholeheartedly by the citizens and greeted by orations and pageants, most with a strong Protestant flavour. Elizabeth's open and gracious responses endeared her to the spectators, who were \"wonderfully ravished\". The following day, 15 January 1559, a date chosen by her astrologer John Dee, Elizabeth was crowned and anointed by Owen Oglethorpe, the Catholic bishop of Carlisle, in Westminster Abbey. She was then presented for the people's acceptance, amidst a deafening noise of organs, fifes, trumpets, drums, and bells. Although Elizabeth was welcomed as queen in England, the country was still in a state of anxiety over the perceived Catholic threat at home and overseas, as well as the choice of whom she would marry.\nChurch settlement.\nElizabeth's personal religious convictions have been much debated by scholars. She was a Protestant, but kept Catholic symbols (such as the crucifix), and downplayed the role of sermons in defiance of a key Protestant belief.\nElizabeth and her advisers perceived the threat of a Catholic crusade against heretical England. The Queen therefore sought a Protestant solution that would not offend Catholics too greatly while addressing the desires of English Protestants, but she would not tolerate the Puritans, who were pushing for far-reaching reforms. As a result, the Parliament of 1559 started to legislate for a church based on the Protestant settlement of Edward VI, with the monarch as its head, but with many Catholic elements, such as vestments.\nThe House of Commons backed the proposals strongly, but the bill of supremacy met opposition in the House of Lords, particularly from the bishops. Elizabeth was fortunate that many bishoprics were vacant at the time, including the Archbishopric of Canterbury. This enabled supporters amongst peers to outvote the bishops and conservative peers. Nevertheless, Elizabeth was forced to accept the title of Supreme Governor of the Church of England rather than the more contentious title of Supreme Head, which many thought unacceptable for a woman to bear. The new Act of Supremacy became law on 8 May 1559. All public officials were forced to swear an oath of loyalty to the monarch as the supreme governor or risk disqualification from office; the heresy laws were repealed, to avoid a repeat of the persecution of dissenters by Mary. At the same time, a new Act of Uniformity was passed, which made attendance at church and the use of the 1559 \"Book of Common Prayer\" (an adapted version of the 1552 prayer book) compulsory, though the penalties for recusancy, or failure to attend and conform, were not extreme.\nMarriage question.\nFrom the start of Elizabeth's reign it was expected that she would marry, and the question arose to whom. Although she received many offers, she never married and remained childless; the reasons for this are not clear. Historians have speculated that Thomas Seymour had put her off sexual relationships. She considered several suitors until she was about 50 years old. Her last courtship was with Francis, Duke of Anjou, 22 years her junior. While risking possible loss of power like her sister, who played into the hands of King Philip II of Spain, marriage offered the chance of an heir. However, the choice of a husband might also provoke political instability or even insurrection.\nRobert Dudley.\nIn the spring of 1559, it became evident that Elizabeth was in love with her childhood friend Robert Dudley. It was said that his wife Amy was suffering from a \"malady in one of her breasts\" and that the Queen would like to marry Robert if his wife should die. By the autumn of 1559, several foreign suitors were vying for Elizabeth's hand; their impatient envoys engaged in ever more scandalous talk and reported that a marriage with her favourite was not welcome in England: \"There is not a man who does not cry out on him and her with indignation\u00a0... she will marry none but the favoured Robert.\" Amy Dudley died in September 1560, from a fall from a flight of stairs and, despite the coroner's inquest finding of accident, many people suspected her husband of having arranged her death so that he could marry the Queen. Elizabeth seriously considered marrying Dudley for some time. However, William Cecil, Nicholas Throckmorton, and some conservative peers made their disapproval unmistakably clear. There were even rumours that the nobility would rise if the marriage took place.\nAmong other marriage candidates being considered for the queen, Robert Dudley continued to be regarded as a possible candidate for nearly another decade. Elizabeth was extremely jealous of his affections, even when she no longer meant to marry him herself. She raised Dudley to the peerage as Earl of Leicester in 1564. In 1578, he finally married Lettice Knollys, to whom the queen reacted with repeated scenes of displeasure and lifelong hatred. Still, Dudley always \"remained at the centre of [Elizabeth's] emotional life\", as historian Susan Doran has described the situation. He died shortly after the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588. After Elizabeth's own death, a note from him was found among her most personal belongings, marked \"his last letter\" in her handwriting.\nForeign candidates.\nMarriage negotiations constituted a key element in Elizabeth's foreign policy. She turned down the hand of Philip, her half-sister's widower, early in 1559 but for several years entertained the proposal of King Eric XIV of Sweden. Earlier in Elizabeth's life, a\u00a0Danish match for her had been discussed; Henry VIII had proposed one with the Danish prince Adolf, Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, in 1545, and Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset, suggested a marriage with Prince Frederick (later Frederick II) several years later, but the negotiations had abated in 1551. In the years around 1559, a Dano-English Protestant alliance was considered, and to counter Sweden's proposal, King Frederick II proposed to Elizabeth in late 1559.\nFor several years, she seriously negotiated to marry Philip's cousin Charles II, Archduke of Austria. By 1569, relations with the Habsburgs had deteriorated. Elizabeth considered marriage to two French Valois princes in turn, first Henry, Duke of Anjou, and then from 1572 to 1581 his brother Francis, Duke of Anjou, formerly Duke of Alen\u00e7on. This last proposal was tied to a planned alliance against Spanish control of the Southern Netherlands. Elizabeth seems to have taken the courtship seriously for a time, wearing a frog-shaped earring that Francis had sent her.\nIn 1563, Elizabeth told an imperial envoy: \"If I follow the inclination of my nature, it is this: beggar-woman and single, far rather than queen and married\". Later in the year, following Elizabeth's illness with smallpox, the succession question became a heated issue in Parliament. Members urged the Queen to marry or nominate an heir, to prevent a civil war upon her death. She refused to do either. In April she prorogued the Parliament, which did not reconvene until she needed its support to raise taxes in 1566.\nHaving previously promised to marry, she told an unruly House:\nBy 1570, senior figures in the government privately accepted that Elizabeth would never marry or name a successor. William Cecil was already seeking solutions to the succession problem. For her failure to marry, Elizabeth was often accused of irresponsibility. Her silence, however, strengthened her own political security: she knew that if she named an heir, her throne would be vulnerable to a coup; she remembered the way that \"a second person, as I have been\" had been used as the focus of plots against her predecessor.\nVirginity.\nElizabeth's unmarried status inspired a cult of virginity related to that of the Virgin Mary. In poetry and portraiture, she was depicted as a virgin, a goddess, or both, not as a normal woman. At first, only Elizabeth made a virtue of her ostensible virginity: in 1559, she told the Commons, \"And, in the end, this shall be for me sufficient, that a marble stone shall declare that a queen, having reigned such a time, lived and died a virgin\". Later on, poets and writers took up the theme and developed an iconography that exalted Elizabeth. Public tributes to the Virgin by 1578 acted as a coded assertion of opposition to the queen's marriage negotiations with the Duke of Alen\u00e7on. Ultimately, Elizabeth would insist she was married to her kingdom and subjects, under divine protection. In 1599, she spoke of \"all my husbands, my good people\".\nThis claim of virginity was not universally accepted. Catholics accused Elizabeth of engaging in \"filthy lust\" that symbolically defiled the nation along with her body. Henry IV of France said that one of the great questions of Europe was \"whether Queen Elizabeth was a maid or no\".\nA central issue, when it comes to the question of Elizabeth's virginity, was whether the Queen ever consummated her love affair with Robert Dudley. In 1559, she had Dudley's bedchambers moved next to her own apartments. In 1561, she was mysteriously bedridden with an illness that caused her body to swell.\nIn 1587, a young man calling himself Arthur Dudley was arrested on the coast of Spain under suspicion of being a spy. The man claimed to be the illegitimate son of Elizabeth and Robert Dudley, with his age being consistent with birth during the 1561 illness. He was taken to Madrid for investigation, where he was examined by Francis Englefield, a Catholic aristocrat exiled to Spain and secretary to King Philip II. Three letters exist today describing the interview, detailing what Arthur proclaimed to be the story of his life, from birth in the royal palace to the time of his arrival in Spain. However, this failed to convince the Spaniards: Englefield admitted to King Philip that Arthur's \"claim at present amounts to nothing\", but suggested that \"he should not be allowed to get away, but [...] kept very secure.\" The King agreed, and Arthur was never heard from again. Modern scholarship dismisses the story's basic premise as \"impossible\", and asserts that Elizabeth's life was so closely observed by contemporaries that she could not have hidden a pregnancy.\nMary, Queen of Scots.\nElizabeth's first policy toward Scotland was to oppose the French presence there. She feared that the French planned to invade England and put her Catholic cousin Mary, Queen of Scots, on the throne. Mary was considered by many to be the heir to the English crown, being the granddaughter of Henry VIII's elder sister, Margaret. Mary boasted being \"the nearest kinswoman she hath\". Elizabeth was persuaded to send a force into Scotland to aid the Protestant rebels, and though the campaign was inept, the resulting Treaty of Edinburgh of July 1560 removed the French threat in the north. When Mary returned from France to Scotland in 1561 to take up the reins of power, the country had an established Protestant church and was run by a council of Protestant nobles supported by Elizabeth. Mary refused to ratify the treaty.\nIn 1563, Elizabeth proposed her own suitor, Robert Dudley, as a husband for Mary, without asking either of the two people concerned. Both proved unenthusiastic, and in 1565, Mary married Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, who carried his own claim to the English throne. The marriage was the first of a series of errors of judgement by Mary that handed the victory to the Scottish Protestants and to Elizabeth. Darnley quickly became unpopular and was murdered in February 1567 by conspirators almost certainly led by James Hepburn, Earl of Bothwell. Shortly afterwards, on 15 May 1567, Mary married Bothwell, arousing suspicions that she had been party to the murder of her husband. Elizabeth confronted Mary about the marriage, writing to her:\nThese events led rapidly to Mary's defeat and imprisonment in Lochleven Castle. The Scottish lords forced her to abdicate in favour of her one-year-old son, James VI. James was taken to Stirling Castle to be raised as a Protestant. Mary escaped in 1568 but after a defeat at Langside sailed to England, where she had once been assured of support from Elizabeth. Elizabeth's first instinct was to restore her fellow monarch, but she and her council instead chose to play safe. Rather than risk returning Mary to Scotland with an English army or sending her to France and the Catholic enemies of England, they detained her in England, where she was imprisoned for the next nineteen years.\nCatholic cause.\nMary was soon the focus for rebellion. In 1569 there was a major Catholic rising in the North; the goal was to free Mary, marry her to Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, and put her on the English throne. After the rebels' defeat, over 750 of them were executed on Elizabeth's orders. In the belief that the revolt had been successful, Pope Pius V issued a bull in 1570, titled \"Regnans in Excelsis\", which declared \"Elizabeth, the pretended Queen of England and the servant of crime\" to be excommunicated and a heretic, releasing all her subjects from any allegiance to her. Catholics who obeyed her orders were threatened with excommunication. The papal bull provoked legislative initiatives against Catholics by Parliament, which were, however, mitigated by Elizabeth's intervention. In 1581, to convert English subjects to Catholicism with \"the intent\" to withdraw them from their allegiance to Elizabeth was made a treasonable offence, carrying the death penalty. From the 1570s missionary priests from continental seminaries went to England secretly in the cause of the \"reconversion of England\". Some were executed for treasonable conduct, engendering a cult of martyrdom.\n\"Regnans in Excelsis\" gave English Catholics a strong incentive to look to Mary as the legitimate sovereign of England. Mary may not have been told of every Catholic plot to put her on the English throne, but from the Ridolfi Plot of 1571 (which caused Mary's suitor, the Duke of Norfolk, to lose his head) to the Babington Plot of 1586, Elizabeth's spymaster Francis Walsingham and the royal council keenly assembled a case against her. At first, Elizabeth resisted calls for Mary's death. By late 1586, she had been persuaded to sanction Mary's trial and execution on the evidence of letters written during the Babington Plot. Elizabeth's proclamation of the sentence announced that \"the said Mary, pretending title to the same Crown, had compassed and imagined within the same realm diverse things tending to the hurt, death and destruction of our royal person.\" On 8 February 1587, Mary was beheaded at Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire. After the execution, Elizabeth claimed that she had not intended for the signed execution warrant to be dispatched, and blamed her secretary, William Davison, for implementing it without her knowledge. The sincerity of Elizabeth's remorse and whether or not she wanted to delay the warrant have been called into question both by her contemporaries and later historians.\nWars and overseas trade.\nElizabeth's foreign policy was largely defensive. The exception was the English occupation of Le Havre from October 1562 to June 1563, which ended in failure when Elizabeth's Huguenot allies joined with the Catholics to retake the port. Elizabeth's intention had been to exchange Le Havre for Calais, lost to France in January 1558. Only through the activities of her fleets did Elizabeth pursue an aggressive policy. This paid off in the war against Spain, 80% of which was fought at sea. She knighted Francis Drake after his circumnavigation of the globe from 1577 to 1580, and he won fame for his raids on Spanish ports and fleets. An element of piracy and self-enrichment drove Elizabethan seafarers, over whom the Queen had little control.\nNetherlands.\nAfter the occupation and loss of Le Havre in 1562\u20131563, Elizabeth avoided military expeditions on the continent until 1585, when she sent an English army to aid the Protestant Dutch rebels against Philip II. This followed the deaths in 1584 of the Queen's allies William the Silent, Prince of Orange, and the Duke of Anjou, and the surrender of a series of Dutch towns to Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, Philip's governor of the Spanish Netherlands. In December 1584, an alliance between Philip II and the French Catholic League at Joinville undermined the ability of Anjou's brother, Henry III of France, to counter Spanish domination of the Netherlands. It also extended Spanish influence along the channel coast of France, where the Catholic League was strong, and exposed England to invasion. The siege of Antwerp in the summer of 1585 by the Duke of Parma necessitated some reaction on the part of the English and the Dutch. The outcome was the Treaty of Nonsuch of August 1585, in which Elizabeth promised military support to the Dutch. The treaty marked the beginning of the Anglo-Spanish War, which lasted until the Treaty of London in 1604.\nThe expedition was led by Elizabeth's former suitor, the Earl of Leicester. Elizabeth from the start did not really back this course of action. Her strategy, to support the Dutch on the surface with an English army, while beginning secret peace talks with Spain within days of Leicester's arrival in Holland, had necessarily to be at odds with Leicester's, who had set up a protectorate and was expected by the Dutch to fight an active campaign. Elizabeth, on the other hand, wanted him \"to avoid at all costs any decisive action with the enemy\". He enraged Elizabeth by accepting the post of Governor-General from the Dutch States General. Elizabeth saw this as a Dutch ploy to force her to accept sovereignty over the Netherlands, which so far she had always declined. She wrote to Leicester:\nElizabeth's \"commandment\" was that her emissary read out her letters of disapproval publicly before the Dutch Council of State, Leicester having to stand nearby. This public humiliation of her \"Lieutenant-General\" combined with her continued talks for a separate peace with Spain irreversibly undermined Leicester's standing among the Dutch. The military campaign was severely hampered by Elizabeth's repeated refusals to send promised funds for her starving soldiers. Her unwillingness to commit herself to the cause, Leicester's own shortcomings as a political and military leader, and the faction-ridden and chaotic situation of Dutch politics led to the failure of the campaign. Leicester finally resigned his command in December 1587.\nSpanish Armada.\nMeanwhile, Francis Drake had undertaken a major voyage against Spanish ports and ships in the Caribbean in 1585 and 1586. In 1587 he made a successful raid on C\u00e1diz, destroying the Spanish fleet of war ships intended for the \"Enterprise of England\", as Philip II had decided to take the war to England.\nOn 12 July 1588, the Spanish Armada, a great fleet of ships, set sail for the channel, planning to ferry a Spanish invasion force under the Duke of Parma to the coast of southeast England from the Netherlands. The armada was defeated by a combination of miscalculation, misfortune, and an attack of English fire ships off Gravelines at midnight on 28\u201329 July (7\u20138 August New Style), which dispersed the Spanish ships to the northeast. The Armada straggled home to Spain in shattered remnants, after disastrous losses on the coast of Ireland (after some ships had tried to struggle back to Spain via the North Sea, and then back south past the west coast of Ireland). Unaware of the Armada's fate, English militias mustered to defend the country under the Earl of Leicester's command. Leicester invited Elizabeth to inspect her troops at Tilbury in Essex on 8 August. Wearing a silver breastplate over a white velvet dress, she addressed them in her Speech to the Troops at Tilbury:\nWhen no invasion came, the nation rejoiced. Elizabeth's procession to a thanksgiving service at St Paul's Cathedral rivalled that of her coronation as a spectacle. The defeat of the armada was a potent propaganda victory, both for Elizabeth and for Protestant England. The English took their delivery as a symbol of God's favour and of the nation's inviolability under a virgin queen. However, the victory was not a turning point in the war, which continued and often favoured Spain. The Spaniards still controlled the southern provinces of the Netherlands, and the threat of invasion remained. Walter Raleigh claimed after her death that Elizabeth's caution had impeded the war against Spain:\nThough some historians have criticised Elizabeth on similar grounds, Elizabeth had good reason not to place too much trust in her commanders, who once in action tended, as she put it herself, \"to be transported with an haviour of vainglory\".\nIn 1589, the year after the Spanish Armada, Elizabeth sent to Spain the \"English Armada\" or \"Counter Armada\" with 23,375 men and 150 ships, led by Francis Drake as admiral and John Norreys as general. The English fleet suffered a catastrophic defeat with 11,000\u201315,000 killed, wounded or died of disease and 40 ships sunk or captured. The advantage England had won upon the destruction of the Spanish Armada was lost, and the Spanish victory marked a revival of Philip II's naval power through the next decade.\nFrance.\nWhen the Protestant Henry IV inherited the French throne in 1589, Elizabeth sent him military support. It was her first venture into France since the retreat from Le Havre in 1563. Henry's succession was strongly contested by the Catholic League and by Philip II, and Elizabeth feared a Spanish takeover of the channel ports.\nThe subsequent English campaigns in France, however, were disorganised and ineffective. Peregrine Bertie, largely ignoring Elizabeth's orders, roamed northern France to little effect, with an army of 4,000 men. He withdrew in disarray in December 1589, having lost half his troops. In 1591, the campaign of John Norreys, who led 3,000 men to Brittany, was even more of a disaster. As for all such expeditions, Elizabeth was unwilling to invest in the supplies and reinforcements requested by the commanders. Norreys left for London to plead in person for more support. In his absence, a Catholic League army almost destroyed the remains of his army at Craon, north-west France, in May 1591.\nIn July, Elizabeth sent out another force under Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex, to help Henry IV in besieging Rouen. The result was just as dismal. Essex accomplished nothing and returned home in January 1592. Henry abandoned the siege in April. As usual, Elizabeth lacked control over her commanders once they were abroad. \"Where he is, or what he doth, or what he is to do,\" she wrote of Essex, \"we are ignorant\".\nIreland.\nAlthough Ireland was one of her two kingdoms, Elizabeth faced a hostile, and in places virtually autonomous, Irish population that adhered to Catholicism and was willing to defy her authority and plot with her enemies. Her policy there was to grant land to her courtiers and prevent the rebels from giving Spain a base from which to attack England. In the course of a series of uprisings, Crown forces pursued scorched-earth tactics, burning the land and slaughtering man, woman and child. During a revolt in Munster led by Gerald FitzGerald, Earl of Desmond, in 1582, an estimated 30,000 Irish people starved to death. The poet and colonist Edmund Spenser wrote that the victims \"were brought to such wretchedness as that any stony heart would have rued the same\". Elizabeth advised her commanders that the Irish, \"that rude and barbarous nation\", be well treated, but she or her commanders showed no remorse when force and bloodshed served their authoritarian purpose.\nBetween 1593 and 1603, Elizabeth faced her most severe test in Ireland during the Nine Years' War, a revolt that took place at the height of hostilities with Spain, who backed the rebel leader, Hugh O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone. In spring 1599, Elizabeth sent Robert Devereux, to put the revolt down. To her frustration, he made little progress and returned to England in defiance of her orders. He was replaced by Charles Blount, who took three years to defeat the rebels. O'Neill finally surrendered in 1603, a few days after Elizabeth's death. Soon afterwards, a peace treaty was signed between England and Spain.\nRussia.\nElizabeth continued to maintain the diplomatic relations with the Tsardom of Russia that were originally established by her half-brother, Edward VI. She often wrote to Tsar Ivan the Terrible on amicable terms, though the Tsar was often annoyed by her focus on commerce rather than on the possibility of a military alliance. Ivan even proposed to her once, and during his later reign, asked for a guarantee to be granted asylum in England should his rule be jeopardised. When this failed, he asked to marry Mary Hastings, which Elizabeth declined to speak to the Russian ambassador about. English merchant and explorer Anthony Jenkinson, who began his career as a representative of the Muscovy Company, became the Queen's special ambassador to the court of Tsar Ivan.\nUpon his death in 1584, Ivan was succeeded by his son Feodor I. Unlike his father, Feodor had no enthusiasm in maintaining exclusive trading rights with England. He declared his kingdom open to all foreigners, and dismissed the English ambassador Jerome Bowes, whose pomposity had been tolerated by Ivan. Elizabeth sent a new ambassador, Dr. Giles Fletcher, to demand from the regent Boris Godunov that he convince the Tsar to reconsider. The negotiations failed, due to Fletcher addressing Feodor with two of his many titles omitted. Elizabeth continued to appeal to Feodor in half appealing, half reproachful letters. She proposed an alliance, something which she had refused to do when offered one by Feodor's father, but was turned down.\nMuslim states.\nTrade and diplomatic relations developed between England and the Barbary states during the rule of Elizabeth. England established a trading relationship with Morocco in opposition to Spain, selling armour, ammunition, timber, and metal in exchange for Moroccan sugar, in spite of a papal ban. In 1600, Abd el-Ouahed ben Messaoud, the principal secretary to the Moroccan ruler Mulai Ahmad al-Mansur, visited England as an ambassador to the English court, to negotiate an Anglo-Moroccan alliance against Spain. Elizabeth \"agreed to sell munitions supplies to Morocco, and she and Mulai Ahmad al-Mansur talked on and off about mounting a joint operation against the Spanish\". Discussions, however, remained inconclusive, and both rulers died within two years of the embassy.\nDiplomatic relations were also established with the Ottoman Empire with the chartering of the Levant Company and the dispatch of the first English ambassador to the Sublime Porte, William Harborne, in 1578. For the first time, a treaty of commerce was signed in 1580. Numerous envoys were dispatched in both directions and epistolar exchanges occurred between Elizabeth and Sultan Murad III. In one correspondence, Murad entertained the notion that Protestantism and Islam had \"much more in common than either did with Roman Catholicism, as both rejected the worship of idols\", and argued for an alliance between England and the Ottoman Empire. To the dismay of Catholic Europe, England exported tin and lead (for cannon-casting) and munitions to the Ottoman Empire, and Elizabeth seriously discussed joint military operations with Murad III during the outbreak of war with Spain in 1585, as Francis Walsingham was lobbying for a direct Ottoman military involvement against the common Spanish enemy.\nAmerica.\nIn 1583, Humphrey Gilbert sailed west to establish a colony in Newfoundland. He never returned to England. Gilbert's half-brother Walter Raleigh explored the Atlantic Coast and claimed the territory of Virginia, perhaps named in honour of Elizabeth, the \"Virgin Queen\". This territory was much larger than the present-day state of Virginia, extending from New England to the Carolinas. In 1585, Raleigh returned to Virginia with a small group of people. They landed on Roanoke Island, off present-day North Carolina. After the failure of the first colony, Raleigh recruited another group and put John White in command. When Raleigh returned in 1590, there was no trace of the Roanoke Colony he had left, but it was the first English settlement in North America.\nEast India Company.\nThe East India Company was formed to trade in the Indian Ocean region and China, and received its charter from Queen Elizabeth on 31 December 1600. For a period of 15 years, the company was awarded a monopoly on English trade with all countries east of the Cape of Good Hope and west of the Straits of Magellan. James Lancaster commanded the first expedition in 1601. The Company eventually controlled half of world trade and substantial territory in India in the 18th and 19th centuries.\nLater years.\nThe period after the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 brought new difficulties for Elizabeth that lasted until the end of her reign. The conflicts with Spain and in Ireland dragged on, the tax burden grew heavier, and the economy was hit by poor harvests and the cost of war. Prices rose and the standard of living fell. During this time, repression of Catholics intensified, and Elizabeth authorised commissions in 1591 to interrogate and monitor Catholic householders. To maintain the illusion of peace and prosperity, she increasingly relied on internal spies and propaganda. In her last years, mounting criticism reflected a decline in the public's affection for her.\nOne of the causes for this \"second reign\" of Elizabeth, as it is sometimes called, was the changed character of Elizabeth's governing body, the privy council in the 1590s. A new generation was in power. With the exception of William Cecil, Baron Burghley, the most important politicians had died around 1590: the Earl of Leicester in 1588; Francis Walsingham in 1590; and Christopher Hatton in 1591. Factional strife in the government, which had not existed in a noteworthy form before the 1590s, now became its hallmark. A bitter rivalry arose between Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, and Robert Cecil, son of Lord Burghley, with both being supported by their respective adherents. The struggle for the most powerful positions in the state marred the kingdom's politics. The Queen's personal authority was lessening, as is shown in the 1594 affair of Dr. Roderigo Lopes, her trusted physician. When he was wrongly accused by the Earl of Essex of treason out of personal pique, she could not prevent the doctor's execution, although she had been angry about his arrest and seems not to have believed in his guilt.\nDuring the last years of her reign, Elizabeth came to rely on the granting of monopolies as a cost-free system of patronage, rather than asking Parliament for more subsidies in a time of war. The practice soon led to price-fixing, the enrichment of courtiers at the public's expense, and widespread resentment. This culminated in agitation in the House of Commons during the parliament of 1601. In her famous \"Golden Speech\" of 30 November 1601 at Whitehall Palace to a deputation of 140 members, Elizabeth professed ignorance of the abuses, and won the members over with promises and her usual appeal to the emotions:\nWho keeps their sovereign from the lapse of error, in which, by ignorance and not by intent they might have fallen, what thank they deserve, we know, though you may guess. And as nothing is more dear to us than the loving conservation of our subjects' hearts, what an undeserved doubt might we have incurred if the abusers of our liberality, the thrallers of our people, the wringers of the poor, had not been told us!\nThis same period of economic and political uncertainty, however, produced an unsurpassed literary flowering in England. The first signs of a new literary movement had appeared at the end of the second decade of Elizabeth's reign, with John Lyly's \"Euphues\" and Edmund Spenser's \"The Shepheardes Calender\" in 1578. During the 1590s, some of the great names of English literature entered their maturity, including William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe. Continuing into the Jacobean era, the English theatre would reach its peak. The notion of a great Elizabethan era depends largely on the builders, dramatists, poets, and musicians who were active during Elizabeth's reign. They owed little directly to the Queen, who was never a major patron of the arts.\nAs Elizabeth aged, her image gradually changed. She was portrayed as Belphoebe or Astraea, and after the Armada, as Gloriana, the eternally youthful Faerie Queene of Edmund Spenser's poem. Elizabeth gave Edmund Spenser a pension; as this was unusual for her, it indicates that she liked his work. Her painted portraits became less realistic and more a set of enigmatic icons that made her look much younger than she was. In fact, her skin had been scarred by smallpox in 1562, leaving her half bald and dependent on wigs and cosmetics. Her love of sweets and fear of dentists contributed to severe tooth decay and loss to such an extent that foreign ambassadors had a hard time understanding her speech. Andr\u00e9 Hurault de Maisse, Ambassador Extraordinary from Henry IV of France, reported an audience with the Queen, during which he noticed, \"her teeth are very yellow and unequal\u00a0... and on the left side less than on the right. Many of them are missing, so that one cannot understand her easily when she speaks quickly.\" Yet he added, \"her figure is fair and tall and graceful in whatever she does; so far as may be she keeps her dignity, yet humbly and graciously withal.\" Walter Raleigh called her \"a lady whom time had surprised\".\nThe more Elizabeth's beauty faded, the more her courtiers praised it. Elizabeth was happy to play the part, but it is possible that in the last decade of her life she began to believe her own performance. She became fond and indulgent of the charming but petulant young Earl of Essex, who was Leicester's stepson and took liberties with her for which she forgave him. She repeatedly appointed him to military posts despite his growing record of irresponsibility. After Essex's desertion of his command in Ireland in 1599, Elizabeth had him placed under house arrest and the following year deprived him of his monopolies. In February 1601, Essex tried to raise a rebellion in London. He intended to seize the Queen but few rallied to his support, and he was beheaded on 25 February. Elizabeth knew that her own misjudgements were partly to blame for this turn of events. An observer wrote in 1602: \"Her delight is to sit in the dark, and sometimes with shedding tears to bewail Essex.\"\nDeath.\nElizabeth's senior adviser, Lord Burghley, died on 4 August 1598. His political mantle passed to his son Robert, who soon became the leader of the government. One task he addressed was to prepare the way for a smooth succession. Since Elizabeth would never name her successor, Robert Cecil was obliged to proceed in secret. He therefore entered into a coded negotiation with James VI of Scotland, who had a strong but unrecognised claim. Cecil coached the impatient James to humour Elizabeth and \"secure the heart of the highest, to whose sex and quality nothing is so improper as either needless expostulations or over much curiosity in her own actions\". The advice worked. James's tone delighted Elizabeth, who responded: \"So trust I that you will not doubt but that your last letters are so acceptably taken as my thanks cannot be lacking for the same, but yield them to you in grateful sort\". In historian J. E. Neale's view, Elizabeth may not have declared her wishes openly to James, but she made them known with \"unmistakable if veiled phrases\".\nThe Queen's health remained fair until the autumn of 1602, when a series of deaths among her friends plunged her into a severe depression. In February 1603, the death of Catherine Carey, Countess of Nottingham, the niece of her cousin and close friend Lady Knollys, came as a particular blow. In March, Elizabeth fell sick and remained in a \"settled and unremovable melancholy\", and sat motionless on a cushion for hours on end. When Robert Cecil told her that she must go to bed, she snapped: \"Must is not a word to use to princes, little man.\" She died on 24 March 1603 at Richmond Palace, between two and three in the morning. A few hours later, Cecil and the council set their plans in motion and proclaimed James king of England.\nWhile it has become normative to record Elizabeth's death as occurring in 1603, following English calendar reform in the 1750s, at the time England observed New Year's Day on 25 March, commonly known as Lady Day. Thus Elizabeth died on the last day of the year 1602 in the old calendar. The modern convention is to use the old style calendar for the day and month while using the new style calendar for the year.\nElizabeth's coffin was carried downriver at night to Whitehall, on a barge lit with torches. At her funeral on 28 April, the coffin was taken to Westminster Abbey on a hearse drawn by four horses hung with black velvet. In the words of the chronicler John Stow:\nElizabeth was interred in Westminster Abbey, in a tomb shared with her half-sister, Mary I. The Latin inscription on their tomb, , translates to \"Consorts in realm and tomb, here we sleep, Elizabeth and Mary, sisters, in hope of resurrection\".\nLegacy.\nElizabeth was lamented by many of her subjects, but others were relieved at her death. Expectations of King James started high but then declined. By the 1620s, there was a nostalgic revival of the cult of Elizabeth. Elizabeth was praised as a heroine of the Protestant cause and the ruler of a golden age. James was depicted as a Catholic sympathiser, presiding over a corrupt court. The triumphalist image that Elizabeth had cultivated towards the end of her reign, against a background of factionalism and military and economic difficulties, was taken at face value and her reputation inflated. Godfrey Goodman, Bishop of Gloucester, recalled: \"When we had experience of a Scottish government, the Queen did seem to revive. Then was her memory much magnified.\" Elizabeth's reign became idealised as a time when crown, church and parliament had worked in constitutional balance.\nThe picture of Elizabeth painted by her Protestant admirers of the early 17th century has proved lasting and influential. Her memory was also revived during the Napoleonic Wars, when the nation again found itself on the brink of invasion. In the Victorian era, the Elizabethan legend was adapted to the imperial ideology of the day, and in the mid-20th century, Elizabeth was a romantic symbol of the national resistance to foreign threat. Historians of that period, such as J. E. Neale (1934) and A. L. Rowse (1950), interpreted Elizabeth's reign as a golden age of progress. Neale and Rowse also idealised the Queen personally: she always did everything right; her more unpleasant traits were ignored or explained as signs of stress.\nRecent historians, however, have taken a more complicated view of Elizabeth. Her reign is famous for the defeat of the Armada, and for successful raids against the Spaniards, such as those on C\u00e1diz in 1587 and 1596, but some historians point to military failures on land and at sea. In Ireland, Elizabeth's forces ultimately prevailed, but their tactics stain her record. Rather than as a brave defender of the Protestant nations against Spain and the Habsburgs, she is more often regarded as cautious in her foreign policies. She offered very limited aid to foreign Protestants and failed to provide her commanders with the funds to make a difference abroad.\nElizabeth established an English church that helped shape a national identity and remains in place today. Those who praised her later as a Protestant heroine overlooked her refusal to drop all practices of Catholic origin from the Church of England. Historians note that in her day, strict Protestants regarded the Acts of Settlement and Uniformity of 1559 as a compromise. In fact, Elizabeth believed that faith was personal and did not wish, as Francis Bacon put it, to \"make windows into men's hearts and secret thoughts\".\nThough Elizabeth followed a largely defensive foreign policy, her reign raised England's status abroad. \"She is only a woman, only mistress of half an island,\" marvelled Pope Sixtus V, \"and yet she makes herself feared by Spain, by France, by the Empire, by all\". Under Elizabeth, the nation gained a new self-confidence and sense of sovereignty, as Christendom fragmented. Elizabeth was the first Tudor to recognise that a monarch ruled by popular consent. She therefore always worked with parliament and advisers she could trust to tell her the truth\u2014a style of government that her Stuart successors failed to follow. Some historians have called her lucky; she believed that God was protecting her. Priding herself on being \"mere English\", Elizabeth trusted in God, honest advice, and the love of her subjects for the success of her rule. In a prayer, she offered thanks to God that:\n[At a time] when wars and seditions with grievous persecutions have vexed almost all kings and countries round about me, my reign hath been peacable, and my realm a receptacle to thy afflicted Church. The love of my people hath appeared firm, and the devices of my enemies frustrate."}
{"id": "10129", "revid": "21327649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10129", "title": "Enceladus (disambiguation)", "text": "Enceladus is a moon of Saturn.\nEnceladus may also refer to:"}
{"id": "10130", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10130", "title": "Emperor Jimmu", "text": " was the legendary first emperor of Japan according to the and . His ascension is traditionally dated as 660 BC. In Japanese mythology, he was a descendant of the sun goddess Amaterasu, through her grandson Ninigi, as well as a descendant of the storm god Susanoo. He launched a military expedition from Hy\u016bga near the Seto Inland Sea, captured Yamato, and established this as his center of power. In modern Japan, Emperor Jimmu's legendary ascension is marked as National Foundation Day on February 11.\nThere is no evidence to suggest that Jimmu existed and is regarded by most modern scholars as a legendary figure.\nName and title.\nJimmu is recorded as Japan's first ruler in two early chronicles, (721) and (712). gives the dates of his reign as 660\u2013585 BC. In the reign of Emperor Kanmu (737\u2013806), the eighth-century scholar \u014cmi no Mifune retroactively designated rulers before Emperor \u014cjin as , a Japanese pendant to the Chinese imperial title \"Ti\u0101n-d\u00ec\" (\u5929\u5e1d), and gave several of them including Jimmu their posthumous names. Prior to this time, these rulers had been known as \"Sumera no mikoto\"/\"\u014ckimi\". This practice had begun under Empress Suiko, and took root after the Taika Reforms with the ascendancy of the Nakatomi clan.\nBoth the and the give Jimmu's name as or . \"Iware\" indicates a toponym (an old place name in the Nara region) whose precise purport is unclear. '-no-Mikoto' is an honorific, indicating divinity, nobility, or royalty.\nAmong his other names were: , and .\nThe Imperial House of Japan traditionally based its claim to the throne on its putative descent from the sun-goddess Amaterasu via Jimmu's great-grandfather Ninigi.\nLegendary narrative.\nIn Japanese mythology, the Age of the Gods is the period before Jimmu's accession.\nThe story of Jimmu seems to rework legends associated with the \u014ctomo clan (\u5927\u4f34\u6c0f), and its function was to establish that clan's links to the ruling family, just as those of Suijin arguably reflect Mononobe tales and the legends in \u014cjin's chronicles seem to derive from Soga clan traditions. Jimmu figures as a direct descendant of the sun goddess, Amaterasu via the side of his father, Ugayafukiaezu. Amaterasu had a son called Ame no Oshihomimi no Mikoto and through him a grandson named Ninigi-no-Mikoto. She sent her grandson to the Japanese islands where he eventually married Konohana-Sakuya-hime. Among their three sons was Hikohohodemi no Mikoto, also called Yamasachi-hiko, who married Toyotama-hime. She was the daughter of Ry\u016bjin, the Japanese sea god. They had a single son called Hikonagisa Takeugaya Fukiaezu no Mikoto. The boy was abandoned by his parents at birth and consequently raised by Tamayori-hime, his mother's younger sister. They eventually married and had four sons. The last of these, Hikohohodemi, became Emperor Jimmu.\nMigration.\nAccording to the chronicles and , Jimmu's brothers Itsuse no Mikoto, Inahi no Mikoto, and Mikeiri no Mikoto were born in Takachiho, the southern part of Ky\u016bsh\u016b in modern-day Miyazaki Prefecture. They moved eastward to find a location more appropriate for administering the entire country. Jimmu's older brother, Itsuse no Mikoto, originally led the migration, and led the clan eastward through the Seto Inland Sea with the assistance of local chieftain \"\". As they reached Naniwa (modern-day Osaka), they encountered another local chieftain, \"Nagasunehiko\" (\"the long-legged man\"), and Itsuse was killed in the ensuing battle. Jimmu realized that they had been defeated because they battled eastward against the sun, so he decided to land on the east side of Kii Peninsula and to battle westward. They reached Kumano, and, with the guidance of a three-legged crow, \"Yatagarasu\" (\"eight-span crow\"), they moved to Yamato. There, they once again battled Nagasunehiko and were victorious. The record in the of Emperor Jimmu states that his armed forces defeated a group of before his enthronement. The Emishi were an ethnic group who lived in Honshu, particularly the T\u014dhoku region.\nIn Yamato, Nigihayahi, who also claimed descent from the Takamagahara gods, was protected by Nagasunehiko. However, when Nigihayahi met Jimmu, he accepted Jimmu's legitimacy. At this point, Jimmu is said to have ascended to the throne of Japan. Upon scaling a Nara mountain to survey the Seto Inland Sea he now controlled, Jimmu remarked that it was shaped like the \"heart\" rings made by mating dragonflies, archaically \"akitsu\" \u79cb\u6d25. A mosquito then tried to steal Jimmu's royal blood but since Jimmu was a god incarnate Emperor, , a dragonfly killed the mosquito. Japan thus received its classical name the Dragonfly Islands, .\nAccording to the , Jimmu died when he was 126 years old. The Emperor's posthumous name literally means \"divine might\" or \"god-warrior\". It is generally thought that Jimmu's name and character evolved into their present shape just before the time in which legends about the origins of the imperial dynasty were chronicled in the . There are accounts written earlier than either and that present an alternative version of the story. According to these accounts, Jimmu's dynasty was supplanted by that of \u014cjin, whose dynasty was supplanted by that of Keitai. The and the then combined these three legendary dynasties into one long and continuous genealogy.\nThe traditional site of Jimmu's grave is near Mount Unebi in Kashihara, Nara Prefecture.\nImperial Era veneration.\nVeneration of Jimmu was a central component of the imperial cult that formed following the Meiji Restoration. In 1873, a holiday called \"Kigensetsu\" was established on February 11. The holiday commemorated the anniversary of Jimmu's ascension to the throne 2,532 years earlier. After World War II, the holiday was criticized as too closely associated with the \"emperor system.\" It was suspended from 1948 to 1966, but later reinstated as National Foundation Day.\nBetween 1873 and 1945 an imperial envoy sent offerings every year to the supposed site of Jimmu's tomb. In 1890 Kashihara Shrine was established nearby, on the spot where Jimmu was said to have ascended to the throne.\nBefore and during World War II, expansionist propaganda made frequent use of the phrase \"hakk\u014d ichiu\", a term coined by Tanaka Chigaku based on a passage in the discussing Emperor Jimmu. Some media incorrectly attributed the phrase to Emperor Jimmu. For the 1940 \"Kigensetsu\" celebration, marking the supposed 2,600th anniversary of Jimmu's enthronement, the Peace Tower was constructed in Miyazaki.\nThe same year numerous stone monuments relating to key events in Jimmu's life were erected around Japan. The sites at which these monuments were erected are known as Emperor Jimmu Sacred Historical Sites.\nIn 1940 Japan and built a monument to Hakk\u014d ichiu despite the fact that all historians knew Jimmu was a mythical figure. In 1941 the Japanese government charged the one historian who dared to challenge Jimmu's existence publicly, .\nHistoricity.\nSince after World War II, when the prohibition on questioning the Kojiki and the Nihongi was lifted, documentary research in China and archaeological research in Japan has undermined much of the information in both the Kojiki and Nihon Shoki. No evidence has been found for Jimmu's existence, except the mention in the and . Today most modern scholars agree that the traditional founding of the imperial dynasty in 660 BC is a myth and that Jimmu is legendary.Emperor Sujin's historicity is considered possible by historians, while Emperor Kinmei is the first verifiable historical figure in the imperial lineage.\nThe dates of Jimmu reigning from 660 BC to 585 BC are improbable. According to Dr. Lu, the year 660 BC was probably selected by the writers of to put the founding of Japan on a kanoto-tori year.\nHowever, the stories of Jimmu may reflect real events of the mid to late Yayoi period. According to historian Peter Wetzler, Jimmu's conquest of Osaka and Nara may reflect an actual event. Still, the dates and many of the details are fictitious. Historian Kenneth G. Henshall stated that Jimmu's conquest may also reflect a time when the Yayoi people from continental Asia immigrated in masses starting from Kyushu and moving eastward during the Yayoi period.\nSome scholars suggest that there may have been a real person behind Jimmu. He could have been a local ruler who conquered the area near Kashihara after 62 BC. Some scholars believe he was present in Miyazaki during the first century BC while others say he was there during the third or fourth century AD. Nevertheless, there is a high probability that there was a powerful dynasty in the vicinity of Miyazaki Prefecture during the Kofun period.\nAccording to Louis Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric, he may have been a fusion of Suijin and Keitai. The Japanese historian Ino Okifu identifies Emperor Jimmu with the Chinese alchemist and explorer Xu Fu, a hypothesis supported by certain traditions in Japan and regarded as possible by some modern scholars. The Yayoi period, during which significant changes in Japanese metallurgy and pottery occurred, started around the time of his supposed arrival. However, the legend of Xu Fu's voyage also has numerous inconsistencies with the linguistic and anthropological history of Japan."}
{"id": "10133", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10133", "title": "Elias Boudinot", "text": "Elias Boudinot ( ; May 2, 1740 \u2013 October 24, 1821) was an American Founding Father, lawyer, statesman, and early abolitionist and women's rights advocate. During the Revolutionary War, Boudinot was an intelligence officer and prisoner-of-war commissary under general George Washington, working to improve conditions for prisoners on both the American and British sides. In 1779, he was elected to the Continental Congress and then to its successor, the Congress of the Confederation, serving as President of Congress in 1782\u20131783, the final years of the war.\nAfter being elected to the first, second, and third U.S. Congresses, where he served from 1789 to 1795, Boudinot was appointed director of the United States Mint by president Washington and held the position through 1805 under the presidencies of John Adams and Thomas Jefferson. An advocate for women's rights, he led a Federalist campaign in New Jersey during the early 1790s to encourage women to become active in politics. Boudinot, a devout Presbyterian, spoke out frequently against slavery, both as a member of Congress and as a private citizen. In 1816, he helped found the American Bible Society and served as its first president for five years. Boudinot was also a member of the board of trustees of Princeton College from 1772 to 1821, the year of his death.\nEarly life and education.\nElias Boudinot was born in Philadelphia in the Province of Pennsylvania on May 2, 1740. His father, Elias Boudinot III, was a merchant and silversmith; he was a neighbor and friend of Benjamin Franklin. His mother, Mary Catherine Williams, was born in the British West Indies; her father was from Wales. Elias' paternal grandfather, Elie (sometimes called Elias) Boudinot, was the son of Jean Boudinot and Marie Suire of Marans, Aunis, France. They were a Huguenot (French Protestant) family who fled to New York about 1687 to avoid the religious persecutions of King Louis XIV.\nMary Catherine Williams and Elias Boudinot Sr. were married on August 8, 1729. Over the next twenty years, they had nine children. The first, John, was born in the British West Indies-Antigua. Of the others, only the younger Elias and his siblings Annis, Mary, and Elisha reached adulthood. Annis became one of the first published women poets in the Thirteen Colonies, and her work appeared in leading newspapers and magazines. Elisha Boudinot became Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of New Jersey.\nAfter studying and being tutored at home, Elias Boudinot went to Princeton, New Jersey to read the law as a legal apprentice to Richard Stockton, an attorney who married Elias' older sister Annis Boudinot. Stockton would also become a Founding Father as a signatory to the Declaration of Independence in 1776.\nCareer.\nIn 1760, Boudinot was admitted to the bar, and began his practice in Elizabeth, New Jersey. He owned land adjacent to the road from Elizabethtown to Woodbridge Township, New Jersey.\nMarriage and family.\nAfter getting established, on April 21, 1762, Boudinot married Hannah Stockton (1736\u20131808), Richard's younger sister. They had two children, Maria Boudinot, who died at age two, and Susan Vergereau Boudinot.\nSusan married William Bradford, who became Chief Justice of Pennsylvania and Attorney General under George Washington. After her husband's death in 1795, Susan Boudinot Bradford returned to her parents' home to live. The young widow edited her father's papers. Now held by Princeton University, these provide significant insight into the events of the Revolutionary era.\nIn 1805, Elias, Hannah and Susan moved to a new home in Burlington, New Jersey. Hannah died a few years after their move, and Elias lived there for the remainder of his years.\nLater career.\nIn his later years, Boudinot invested and speculated in land. He owned large tracts in Ohio including most of Green Township in what is now the western suburbs of Cincinnati, where there is a street bearing his surname. At his death, he willed to the city of Philadelphia for parks and city needs. He was buried in the churchyard of St. Mary's Church, Burlington, New Jersey.\nPolitical career.\nBoudinot became a prominent lawyer and his practice prospered. As the revolution drew near, he aligned with the Whigs, and was elected to the New Jersey provincial assembly in 1775. In the early stages of the Revolutionary War, he was active in promoting enlistment; several times he loaned money to field commanders to purchase supplies. Boudinot helped support the activities of rebel spies.\nAfter the British occupation of New York City, spies were sent to Staten Island and Long Island, to observe and report on movements of specific British garrisons and regiments.\nOn May 5, 1777, General George Washington asked Boudinot to be appointed as commissary general for prisoners. Congress through the board of war concurred. Boudinot was commissioned as a colonel in the Continental Army for this work. He served until July 1778, when competing responsibilities forced him to resign. The commissary managed enemy prisoners, and also was responsible for supplying American prisoners who were held by the British.\nIn November 1777, the New Jersey legislature named Boudinot as one of their delegates to the Second Continental Congress. His duties as Commissary prevented his attendance, so in May 1778 he resigned. By early July he had been replaced and attended his first meeting of the Congress on July 7, 1778. As a delegate, he still continued his concerns for the welfare of prisoners of war. His first term ended that year.\nIn 1781, Boudinot returned to the Congress, for a term lasting through 1783. In November 1782, he was elected as President of the Continental Congress for a one-year term. The President of Congress was a mostly ceremonial position with no real authority, but the office did require him to handle a good deal of correspondence and sign official documents. On April 15, 1783, he signed the Preliminary Articles of Peace. He also served as Secretary of Foreign affairs from June 1783 to December 1784. When the United States government was formed in 1789, Boudinot was elected from New Jersey to the US House of Representatives; he was also an unsuccessful candidate for the U.S. Senate that year. He was elected to the second and third congresses as well, where he generally supported the administration. He refused to join the expansion of affiliated groups that formed formal political parties. He was one of nine representatives to vote against the Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution.\nIn 1794, he declined to serve another term, and left Congress in early 1795. In October 1795, President George Washington appointed him as Director of the United States Mint, a position he held through succeeding administrations until he retired in 1805.\nLater public service.\nIn addition to serving in political office, Elias supported many civic, religious, and educational causes during his life. Boudinot served as one of the trustees of the College of New Jersey (later Princeton University) for nearly half a century, from 1772 until 1821. When the Continental Congress was forced to leave Philadelphia in 1783 while he was president, he moved the meetings to Princeton, where they met in the college's Nassau Hall.\nOn September 24, 1789, the House of Representatives voted to recommend the First Amendment of the newly drafted Constitution to the states for ratification. The next day, Congressman Boudinot proposed that the House and Senate jointly request of President Washington to proclaim a day of thanksgiving for \"the many signal favors of Almighty God.\" Boudinot said that he\ncould not think of letting the session pass over without offering an opportunity to all the citizens of the United States of joining, with one voice, in returning to Almighty God their sincere thanks for the many blessings he had poured down upon them.\nBoudinot was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1814.\nA devout Presbyterian, Boudinot supported missions and missionary work. He wrote \"The Age of Revelation\" in response to Thomas Paine's \"The Age of Reason.\" He was one of the founders of the American Bible Society, and after 1816 served as its president.\nHe argued for the rights of black and American Indian citizens, and sponsored students to the Board School for Indians in Connecticut. One of these, a young Cherokee named \"Gallegina Uwatie\", also known as \"Buck Watie\", stayed with him in Burlington on his way to the school. The two so impressed each other that \"Gallegina\" asked for and was given permission to adopt the statesman's name. Later known as Elias Boudinot, he was an editor of the \"Cherokee Phoenix\", the nation's first newspaper, which was published in Cherokee and English.\nArchival collections.\nThe Presbyterian Historical Society in Philadelphia has a collection of incoming correspondence and several legal agreements pertaining to land ownership related to Boudinot from 1777 to 1821 in its holdings. The correspondence dating from 1777 to 1778 almost exclusively deals with the trading and releasing of prisoners.\nFurther reading.\nElias Boudinot, \"Age of Revelation\"\u2014A Refutation of Thomas Paine's deistic \"Age of Reason\""}
{"id": "10134", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10134", "title": "Electromagnetic spectrum", "text": "The electromagnetic spectrum is the full range of electromagnetic radiation, organized by frequency or wavelength. The spectrum is divided into separate bands, with different names for the electromagnetic waves within each band. From low to high frequency these are: radio waves, microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays. The electromagnetic waves in each of these bands have different characteristics, such as how they are produced, how they interact with matter, and their practical applications.\nRadio waves, at the low-frequency end of the spectrum, have the lowest photon energy and the longest wavelengths\u2014thousands of kilometers, or more. They can be emitted and received by antennas, and pass through the atmosphere, foliage, and most building materials.\nGamma rays, at the high-frequency end of the spectrum, have the highest photon energies and the shortest wavelengths\u2014much smaller than an atomic nucleus. Gamma rays, X-rays, and extreme ultraviolet rays are called ionizing radiation because their high photon energy is able to ionize atoms, causing chemical reactions. Longer-wavelength radiation such as visible light is nonionizing; the photons do not have sufficient energy to ionize atoms.\nThroughout most of the electromagnetic spectrum, spectroscopy can be used to separate waves of different frequencies, so that the intensity of the radiation can be measured as a function of frequency or wavelength. Spectroscopy is used to study the interactions of electromagnetic waves with matter.\nHistory and discovery.\nHumans have always been aware of visible light and radiant heat but for most of history it was not known that these phenomena were connected or were representatives of a more extensive principle. The ancient Greeks recognized that light traveled in straight lines and studied some of its properties, including reflection and refraction. Light was intensively studied from the beginning of the 17th century leading to the invention of important instruments like the telescope and microscope. Isaac Newton was the first to use the term \"spectrum\" for the range of colours that white light could be split into with a prism. Starting in 1666, Newton showed that these colours were intrinsic to light and could be recombined into white light. A debate arose over whether light had a wave nature or a particle nature with Ren\u00e9 Descartes, Robert Hooke and Christiaan Huygens favouring a wave description and Newton favouring a particle description. Huygens in particular had a well developed theory from which he was able to derive the laws of reflection and refraction. Around 1801, Thomas Young measured the wavelength of a light beam with his two-slit experiment thus conclusively demonstrating that light was a wave.\nIn 1800, William Herschel discovered infrared radiation. He was studying the temperature of different colours by moving a thermometer through light split by a prism. He noticed that the highest temperature was beyond red. He theorized that this temperature change was due to \"calorific rays\", a type of light ray that could not be seen. The next year, Johann Ritter, working at the other end of the spectrum, noticed what he called \"chemical rays\" (invisible light rays that induced certain chemical reactions). These behaved similarly to visible violet light rays, but were beyond them in the spectrum. They were later renamed ultraviolet radiation.\nThe study of electromagnetism began in 1820 when Hans Christian \u00d8rsted discovered that electric currents produce magnetic fields (Oersted's law). Light was first linked to electromagnetism in 1845, when Michael Faraday noticed that the polarization of light traveling through a transparent material responded to a magnetic field (see Faraday effect). During the 1860s, James Clerk Maxwell developed four partial differential equations (Maxwell's equations) for the electromagnetic field. Two of these equations predicted the possibility and behavior of waves in the field. Analyzing the speed of these theoretical waves, Maxwell realized that they must travel at a speed that was about the known speed of light. This startling coincidence in value led Maxwell to make the inference that light itself is a type of electromagnetic wave. Maxwell's equations predicted an infinite range of frequencies of electromagnetic waves, all traveling at the speed of light. This was the first indication of the existence of the entire electromagnetic spectrum.\nMaxwell's predicted waves included waves at very low frequencies compared to infrared, which in theory might be created by oscillating charges in an ordinary electrical circuit of a certain type. Attempting to prove Maxwell's equations and detect such low frequency electromagnetic radiation, in 1886, the physicist Heinrich Hertz built an apparatus to generate and detect what are now called radio waves. Hertz found the waves and was able to infer (by measuring their wavelength and multiplying it by their frequency) that they traveled at the speed of light. Hertz also demonstrated that the new radiation could be both reflected and refracted by various dielectric media, in the same manner as light. For example, Hertz was able to focus the waves using a lens made of tree resin. In a later experiment, Hertz similarly produced and measured the properties of microwaves. These new types of waves paved the way for inventions such as the wireless telegraph and the radio.\nIn 1895, Wilhelm R\u00f6ntgen noticed a new type of radiation emitted during an experiment with an evacuated tube subjected to a high voltage. He called this radiation \"x-rays\" and found that they were able to travel through parts of the human body but were reflected or stopped by denser matter such as bones. Before long, many uses were found for this radiography.\nThe last portion of the electromagnetic spectrum was filled in with the discovery of gamma rays. In 1900, Paul Villard was studying the radioactive emissions of radium when he identified a new type of radiation that he at first thought consisted of particles similar to known alpha and beta particles, but with the power of being far more penetrating than either. However, in 1910, British physicist William Henry Bragg demonstrated that gamma rays are electromagnetic radiation, not particles, and in 1914, Ernest Rutherford (who had named them gamma rays in 1903 when he realized that they were fundamentally different from charged alpha and beta particles) and Edward Andrade measured their wavelengths, and found that gamma rays were similar to X-rays, but with shorter wavelengths.\nThe wave-particle debate was rekindled in 1901 when Max Planck discovered that light is absorbed only in discrete \"quanta\", now called photons, implying that light has a particle nature. This idea was made explicit by Albert Einstein in 1905, but never accepted by Planck and many other contemporaries. The modern position of science is that electromagnetic radiation has both a wave and a particle nature, the wave-particle duality. The contradictions arising from this position are still being debated by scientists and philosophers.\nRange.\nElectromagnetic waves are typically described by any of the following three physical properties: the frequency \"f\", wavelength \u03bb, or photon energy \"E\". Frequencies observed in astronomy range from (1 GeV gamma rays) down to the local plasma frequency of the ionized interstellar medium (~1\u00a0kHz). Wavelength is inversely proportional to the wave frequency, so gamma rays have very short wavelengths that are fractions of the size of atoms, whereas wavelengths on the opposite end of the spectrum can be indefinitely long. Photon energy is directly proportional to the wave frequency, so gamma ray photons have the highest energy (around a billion electron volts), while radio wave photons have very low energy (around a femtoelectronvolt). These relations are illustrated by the following equations:\nwhere:\nWhenever electromagnetic waves travel in a medium with matter, their wavelength is decreased. Wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation, whatever medium they are traveling through, are usually quoted in terms of the \"vacuum wavelength\", although this is not always explicitly stated.\nGenerally, electromagnetic radiation is classified by wavelength into radio wave, microwave, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays and gamma rays. The behavior of EM radiation depends on its wavelength. When EM radiation interacts with single atoms and molecules, its behavior also depends on the amount of energy per quantum (photon) it carries.\nSpectroscopy can detect a much wider region of the EM spectrum than the visible wavelength range of 400\u00a0nm to 700\u00a0nm in a vacuum. A common laboratory spectroscope can detect wavelengths from 2\u00a0nm to 2500\u00a0nm. Detailed information about the physical properties of objects, gases, or even stars can be obtained from this type of device. Spectroscopes are widely used in astrophysics. For example, many hydrogen atoms emit a radio wave photon that has a wavelength of 21.12\u00a0cm. Also, frequencies of 30 Hz and below can be produced by and are important in the study of certain stellar nebulae and frequencies as high as have been detected from astrophysical sources.\nRegions.\nThe types of electromagnetic radiation are broadly classified into the following classes (regions, bands or types):\nThis classification goes in the increasing order of wavelength, which is characteristic of the type of radiation.\nThere are no precisely defined boundaries between the bands of the electromagnetic spectrum; rather they fade into each other like the bands in a rainbow. Radiation of each frequency and wavelength (or in each band) has a mix of properties of the two regions of the spectrum that bound it. For example, red light resembles infrared radiation, in that it can excite and add energy to some chemical bonds and indeed must do so to power the chemical mechanisms responsible for photosynthesis and the working of the visual system.\nIn atomic and nuclear physics, the distinction between X-rays and gamma rays is based on sources: the photons generated from nuclear decay or other nuclear and subnuclear/particle process are termed gamma rays, whereas X-rays are generated by electronic transitions involving energetically deep inner atomic electrons. Electronic transitions in muonic atoms transitions are also said to produce X-rays. In astrophysics, energies below 100keV are called X-rays and higher energies are gamma rays.\nThe region of the spectrum where electromagnetic radiation is observed may differ from the region it was emitted in due to relative velocity of the source and observer, (the Doppler shift), relative gravitational potential (gravitational redshift), or expansion of the universe (cosmological redshift). For example, the cosmic microwave background, relic blackbody radiation from the era of recombination, started out at energies around 1eV, but as has undergone enough cosmological red shift to put it into the microwave region of the spectrum for observers on Earth.\nRationale for names.\nElectromagnetic radiation interacts with matter in different ways across the spectrum. These types of interaction are so different that historically different names have been applied to different parts of the spectrum, as though these were different types of radiation. Thus, although these \"different kinds\" of electromagnetic radiation form a quantitatively continuous spectrum of frequencies and wavelengths, the spectrum remains divided for practical reasons arising from these qualitative interaction differences.\nTypes of radiation.\nRadio waves.\nRadio waves are emitted and received by antennas, which consist of conductors such as metal rod resonators. In artificial generation of radio waves, an electronic device called a transmitter generates an alternating electric current which is applied to an antenna. The oscillating electrons in the antenna generate oscillating electric and magnetic fields that radiate away from the antenna as radio waves. In reception of radio waves, the oscillating electric and magnetic fields of a radio wave couple to the electrons in an antenna, pushing them back and forth, creating oscillating currents which are applied to a radio receiver. Earth's atmosphere is mainly transparent to radio waves, except for layers of charged particles in the ionosphere which can reflect certain frequencies.\nRadio waves are extremely widely used to transmit information across distances in radio communication systems such as radio broadcasting, television, two way radios, mobile phones, communication satellites, and wireless networking. In a radio communication system, a radio frequency current is modulated with an information-bearing signal in a transmitter by varying either the amplitude, frequency or phase, and applied to an antenna. The radio waves carry the information across space to a receiver, where they are received by an antenna and the information extracted by demodulation in the receiver. Radio waves are also used for navigation in systems like Global Positioning System (GPS) and navigational beacons, and locating distant objects in radiolocation and radar. They are also used for remote control, and for industrial heating.\nThe use of the radio spectrum is strictly regulated by governments, coordinated by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) which allocates frequencies to different users for different uses.\nMicrowaves.\nMicrowaves are radio waves of short wavelength, from about 10 centimeters to one millimeter, in the SHF and EHF frequency bands. Microwave energy is produced with klystron and magnetron tubes, and with solid state devices such as Gunn and IMPATT diodes. Although they are emitted and absorbed by short antennas, they are also absorbed by polar molecules, coupling to vibrational and rotational modes, resulting in bulk heating. Unlike higher frequency waves such as infrared and visible light which are absorbed mainly at surfaces, microwaves can penetrate into materials and deposit their energy below the surface. This effect is used to heat food in microwave ovens, and for industrial heating and medical diathermy. Microwaves are the main wavelengths used in radar, and are used for satellite communication, and wireless networking technologies such as Wi-Fi. The copper cables (transmission lines) which are used to carry lower-frequency radio waves to antennas have excessive power losses at microwave frequencies, and metal pipes called waveguides are used to carry them. Although at the low end of the band the atmosphere is mainly transparent, at the upper end of the band absorption of microwaves by atmospheric gases limits practical propagation distances to a few kilometers.\nTerahertz radiation or sub-millimeter radiation is a region of the spectrum from about 100\u00a0GHz to 30 terahertz (THz) between microwaves and far infrared which can be regarded as belonging to either band. Until recently, the range was rarely studied and few sources existed for microwave energy in the so-called \"terahertz gap\", but applications such as imaging and communications are now appearing. Scientists are also looking to apply terahertz technology in the armed forces, where high-frequency waves might be directed at enemy troops to incapacitate their electronic equipment. Terahertz radiation is strongly absorbed by atmospheric gases, making this frequency range useless for long-distance communication.\nInfrared radiation.\nThe infrared part of the electromagnetic spectrum covers the range from roughly 300\u00a0GHz to 400\u00a0THz (1\u00a0mm \u2013 750\u00a0nm). It can be divided into three parts:\nVisible light.\nAbove infrared in frequency comes visible light. The Sun emits its peak power in the visible region, although integrating the entire emission power spectrum through all wavelengths shows that the Sun emits slightly more infrared than visible light. By definition, visible light is the part of the EM spectrum the human eye is the most sensitive to. Visible light (and near-infrared light) is typically absorbed and emitted by electrons in molecules and atoms that move from one energy level to another. This action allows the chemical mechanisms that underlie human vision and plant photosynthesis. The light that excites the human visual system is a very small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. A rainbow shows the optical (visible) part of the electromagnetic spectrum; infrared (if it could be seen) would be located just beyond the red side of the rainbow whilst ultraviolet would appear just beyond the opposite violet end.\nElectromagnetic radiation with a wavelength between 380 nm and 760\u00a0nm (400\u2013790 terahertz) is detected by the human eye and perceived as visible light. Other wavelengths, especially near infrared (longer than 760\u00a0nm) and ultraviolet (shorter than 380\u00a0nm) are also sometimes referred to as light, especially when the visibility to humans is not relevant. White light is a combination of lights of different wavelengths in the visible spectrum. Passing white light through a prism splits it up into the several colours of light observed in the visible spectrum between 400\u00a0nm and 780\u00a0nm.\nIf radiation having a frequency in the visible region of the EM spectrum reflects off an object, say, a bowl of fruit, and then strikes the eyes, this results in visual perception of the scene. The brain's visual system processes the multitude of reflected frequencies into different shades and hues, and through this insufficiently understood psychophysical phenomenon, most people perceive a bowl of fruit.\nAt most wavelengths, however, the information carried by electromagnetic radiation is not directly detected by human senses. Natural sources produce EM radiation across the spectrum, and technology can also manipulate a broad range of wavelengths. Optical fiber transmits light that, although not necessarily in the visible part of the spectrum (it is usually infrared), can carry information. The modulation is similar to that used with radio waves.\nUltraviolet radiation.\nNext in frequency comes ultraviolet (UV). In frequency (and thus energy), UV rays sit between the violet end of the visible spectrum and the X-ray range. The UV wavelength spectrum ranges from 399\u00a0nm to 10\u00a0nm and is divided into 3 sections: UVA, UVB, and UVC.\nUV is the lowest energy range energetic enough to ionize atoms, separating electrons from them, and thus causing chemical reactions. UV, X-rays, and gamma rays are thus collectively called \"ionizing radiation\"; exposure to them can damage living tissue. UV can also cause substances to glow with visible light; this is called \"fluorescence\". UV fluorescence is used by forensics to detect any evidence like blood and urine, that is produced by a crime scene. Also UV fluorescence is used to detect counterfeit money and IDs, as they are laced with material that can glow under UV.\nAt the middle range of UV, UV rays cannot ionize but can break chemical bonds, making molecules unusually reactive. Sunburn, for example, is caused by the disruptive effects of middle range UV radiation on skin cells, which is the main cause of skin cancer. UV rays in the middle range can irreparably damage the complex DNA molecules in the cells producing thymine dimers making it a very potent mutagen. Due to skin cancer caused by UV, the sunscreen industry was invented to combat UV damage. Mid UV wavelengths are called UVB and UVB lights such as germicidal lamps are used to kill germs and also to sterilize water.\nThe Sun emits UV radiation (about 10% of its total power), including extremely short wavelength UV that could potentially destroy most life on land (ocean water would provide some protection for life there). However, most of the Sun's damaging UV wavelengths are absorbed by the atmosphere before they reach the surface. The higher energy (shortest wavelength) ranges of UV (called \"vacuum UV\") are absorbed by nitrogen and, at longer wavelengths, by simple diatomic oxygen in the air. Most of the UV in the mid-range of energy is blocked by the ozone layer, which absorbs strongly in the important 200\u2013315\u00a0nm range, the lower energy part of which is too long for ordinary dioxygen in air to absorb. This leaves less than 3% of sunlight at sea level in UV, with all of this remainder at the lower energies. The remainder is UV-A, along with some UV-B. The very lowest energy range of UV between 315\u00a0nm and visible light (called UV-A) is not blocked well by the atmosphere, but does not cause sunburn and does less biological damage. However, it is not harmless and does create oxygen radicals, mutations and skin damage.\nX-rays.\nAfter UV come X-rays, which, like the upper ranges of UV are also ionizing. However, due to their higher energies, X-rays can also interact with matter by means of the Compton effect. Hard X-rays have shorter wavelengths than soft X-rays and as they can pass through many substances with little absorption, they can be used to 'see through' objects with 'thicknesses' less than that equivalent to a few meters of water. One notable use is diagnostic X-ray imaging in medicine (a process known as radiography). X-rays are useful as probes in high-energy physics. In astronomy, the accretion disks around neutron stars and black holes emit X-rays, enabling studies of these phenomena. X-rays are also emitted by stellar corona and are strongly emitted by some types of nebulae. However, X-ray telescopes must be placed outside the Earth's atmosphere to see astronomical X-rays, since the great depth of the atmosphere of Earth is opaque to X-rays (with areal density of 1000 g/cm2), equivalent to 10 meters thickness of water. This is an amount sufficient to block almost all astronomical X-rays (and also astronomical gamma rays\u2014see below).\nGamma rays.\nAfter hard X-rays come gamma rays, which were discovered by Paul Ulrich Villard in 1900. These are the most energetic photons, having no defined lower limit to their wavelength. In astronomy they are valuable for studying high-energy objects or regions, however as with X-rays this can only be done with telescopes outside the Earth's atmosphere. Gamma rays are used experimentally by physicists for their penetrating ability and are produced by a number of radioisotopes. They are used for irradiation of foods and seeds for sterilization, and in medicine they are occasionally used in radiation cancer therapy. More commonly, gamma rays are used for diagnostic imaging in nuclear medicine, an example being PET scans. The wavelength of gamma rays can be measured with high accuracy through the effects of Compton scattering."}
{"id": "10136", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10136", "title": "Expert system", "text": "In artificial intelligence (AI), an expert system is a computer system emulating the decision-making ability of a human expert.\nExpert systems are designed to solve complex problems by reasoning through bodies of knowledge, represented mainly as if\u2013then rules rather than through conventional procedural programming code. Expert systems were among the first truly successful forms of AI software. They were created in the 1970s and then proliferated in the 1980s, being then widely regarded as the future of AI \u2014 before the advent of successful artificial neural networks.\nAn expert system is divided into two subsystems: 1) a \"knowledge base\", which represents facts and rules; and 2) an \"inference engine\", which applies the rules to the known facts to deduce new facts, and can include explaining and debugging abilities.\nHistory.\nEarly development.\nSoon after the dawn of modern computers in the late 1940s and early 1950s, researchers started realizing the immense potential these machines had for modern society. One of the first challenges was to make such machines able to \u201cthink\u201d like humans \u2013 in particular, making these machines able to make important decisions the way humans do. The medical\u2013healthcare field presented the tantalizing challenge of enabling these machines to make medical diagnostic decisions.\nThus, in the late 1950s, right after the information age had fully arrived, researchers started experimenting with the prospect of using computer technology to emulate human decision making. For example, biomedical researchers started creating computer-aided systems for diagnostic applications in medicine and biology. These early diagnostic systems used patients\u2019 symptoms and laboratory test results as inputs to generate a diagnostic outcome.\nThese systems were often described as the early forms of expert systems. However, researchers realized that there were significant limits when using traditional methods such as flow charts,\n statistical pattern matching, or probability theory.\nFormal introduction and later developments.\nThis previous situation gradually led to the development of expert systems, which used knowledge-based approaches. These expert systems in medicine were the MYCIN expert system, the Internist-I expert system and later, in the middle of the 1980s, the CADUCEUS.\nExpert systems were formally introduced around 1965 by the Stanford Heuristic Programming Project led by Edward Feigenbaum, who is sometimes termed the \"father of expert systems\"; other key early contributors were Bruce Buchanan and Randall Davis. The Stanford researchers tried to identify domains where expertise was highly valued and complex, such as diagnosing infectious diseases (Mycin) and identifying unknown organic molecules (Dendral). The idea that \"intelligent systems derive their power from the knowledge they possess rather than from the specific formalisms and inference schemes they use\" \u2013 as Feigenbaum said \u2013 was at the time a significant step forward, since the past research had been focused on heuristic computational methods, culminating in attempts to develop very general-purpose problem solvers (foremostly the conjunct work of Allen Newell and Herbert Simon). Expert systems became some of the first truly successful forms of artificial intelligence (AI) software.\nResearch on expert systems was also active in Europe. In the US, the focus tended to be on the use of production rule systems, first on systems hard coded on top of Lisp programming environments and then on expert system shells developed by vendors such as Intellicorp. In Europe, research focused more on systems and expert systems shells developed in Prolog. The advantage of Prolog systems was that they employed a form of rule-based programming that was based on formal logic.\nOne such early expert system shell based on Prolog was APES.\nOne of the first use cases of Prolog and APES was in the legal area namely, the encoding of a large portion of the British Nationality Act. Lance Elliot wrote: \"The British Nationality Act was passed in 1981 and shortly thereafter was used as a means of showcasing the efficacy of using Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques and technologies, doing so to explore how the at-the-time newly enacted statutory law might be encoded into a computerized logic-based formalization. A now oft-cited research paper entitled \u201cThe British Nationality Act as a Logic Program\u201d was published in 1986 and subsequently became a hallmark for subsequent work in AI and the law.\"\nIn the 1980s, expert systems proliferated. Universities offered expert system courses and two-thirds of the Fortune 500 companies applied the technology in daily business activities. Interest was international with the Fifth Generation Computer Systems project in Japan and increased research funding in Europe.\nIn 1981, the first IBM PC, with the PC DOS operating system, was introduced. The imbalance between the high affordability of the relatively powerful chips in the PC, compared to the much more expensive cost of processing power in the mainframes that dominated the corporate IT world at the time, created a new type of architecture for corporate computing, termed the client\u2013server model. Calculations and reasoning could be performed at a fraction of the price of a mainframe using a PC. This model also enabled business units to bypass corporate IT departments and directly build their own applications. As a result, client-server had a tremendous impact on the expert systems market. Expert systems were already outliers in much of the business world, requiring new skills that many IT departments did not have and were not eager to develop. They were a natural fit for new PC-based shells that promised to put application development into the hands of end users and experts. Until then, the main development environment for expert systems had been high end Lisp machines from Xerox, Symbolics, and Texas Instruments. With the rise of the PC and client-server computing, vendors such as Intellicorp and Inference Corporation shifted their priorities to developing PC-based tools. Also, new vendors, often financed by venture capital (such as Aion Corporation, Neuron Data, Exsys, VP-Expert, and many others), started appearing regularly.\nThe first expert system to be used in a design capacity for a large-scale product was the Synthesis of Integral Design (SID) software program, developed in 1982. Written in Lisp, SID generated 93% of the VAX 9000 CPU logic gates. Input to the software was a set of rules created by several expert logic designers. SID expanded the rules and generated software logic synthesis routines many times the size of the rules themselves. Surprisingly, the combination of these rules resulted in an overall design that exceeded the capabilities of the experts themselves, and in many cases out-performed the human counterparts. While some rules contradicted others, top-level control parameters for speed and area provided the tie-breaker. The program was highly controversial but used nevertheless due to project budget constraints. It was terminated by logic designers after the VAX 9000 project completion.\nDuring the years before the middle of the 1970s, the expectations of what expert systems can accomplish in many fields tended to be extremely optimistic. At the start of these early studies, researchers were hoping to develop entirely automatic (i.e., completely computerized) expert systems. The expectations of people of what computers can do were frequently too idealistic. This situation radically changed after Richard M. Karp published his breakthrough paper: \u201cReducibility among Combinatorial Problems\u201d in the early 1970s. Thanks to Karp's work, together with other scholars, like Hubert L. Dreyfus, it became clear that there are certain limits and possibilities when one designs computer algorithms. His findings describe what computers can do and what they cannot do. Many of the computational problems related to this type of expert systems have certain pragmatic limits. These findings laid down the groundwork that led to the next developments in the field.\nIn the 1990s and beyond, the term \"expert system\" and the idea of a standalone AI system mostly dropped from the IT lexicon. There are two interpretations of this. One is that \"expert systems failed\": the IT world moved on because expert systems did not deliver on their over hyped promise. The other is the mirror opposite, that expert systems were simply victims of their success: as IT professionals grasped concepts such as rule engines, such tools migrated from being standalone tools for developing special purpose \"expert\" systems, to being one of many standard tools. Other researchers suggest that Expert Systems caused inter-company power struggles when the IT organization lost its exclusivity in software modifications to users or Knowledge Engineers.\nIn the first decade of the 2000s, there was a \"resurrection\" for the technology, while using the term \"rule-based systems\", with significant success stories and adoption. Many of the leading major business application suite vendors (such as SAP, Siebel, and Oracle) integrated expert system abilities into their suite of products as a way to specify business logic. Rule engines are no longer simply for defining the rules an expert would use but for any type of complex, volatile, and critical business logic; they often go hand in hand with business process automation and integration environments.\nCurrent approaches to expert systems.\nThe limits of prior type of expert systems prompted researchers to develop new types of approaches. They have developed more efficient, flexible, and powerful methods to simulate the human decision-making process. Some of the approaches that researchers have developed are based on new methods of artificial intelligence (AI), and in particular in machine learning and data mining approaches with a feedback mechanism. Recurrent neural networks often take advantage of such mechanisms. Related is the discussion on the disadvantages section.\nModern systems can incorporate new knowledge more easily and thus update themselves easily. Such systems can generalize from existing knowledge better and deal with vast amounts of complex data. Related is the subject of big data here. Sometimes these type of expert systems are called \"intelligent systems.\"\nMore recently, it can be argued that expert systems have moved into the area of business rules and business rules management systems.\nSoftware architecture.\nAn expert system is an example of a knowledge-based system. Expert systems were the first commercial systems to use a knowledge-based architecture. In general view, an expert system includes the following components: a knowledge base, an inference engine, an explanation facility, a knowledge acquisition facility, and a user interface.\nThe knowledge base represents facts about the world. In early expert systems such as Mycin and Dendral, these facts were represented mainly as flat assertions about variables. In later expert systems developed with commercial shells, the knowledge base took on more structure and used concepts from object-oriented programming. The world was represented as classes, subclasses, and instances and assertions were replaced by values of object instances. The rules worked by querying and asserting values of the objects.\nThe inference engine is an automated reasoning system that evaluates the current state of the knowledge-base, applies relevant rules, and then asserts new knowledge into the knowledge base. The inference engine may also include abilities for explanation, so that it can explain to a user the chain of reasoning used to arrive at a particular conclusion by tracing back over the firing of rules that resulted in the assertion.\nThere are mainly two modes for an inference engine: forward chaining and backward chaining. The different approaches are dictated by whether the inference engine is being driven by the antecedent (left hand side) or the consequent (right hand side) of the rule. In forward chaining an antecedent fires and asserts the consequent. For example, consider the following rule:\nformula_1\nA simple example of forward chaining would be to assert Man(Socrates) to the system and then trigger the inference engine. It would match R1 and assert Mortal(Socrates) into the knowledge base.\nBackward chaining is a bit less straight forward. In backward chaining the system looks at possible conclusions and works backward to see if they might be true. So if the system was trying to determine if Mortal(Socrates) is true it would find R1 and query the knowledge base to see if Man(Socrates) is true. One of the early innovations of expert systems shells was to integrate inference engines with a user interface. This could be especially powerful with backward chaining. If the system needs to know a particular fact but does not, then it can simply generate an input screen and ask the user if the information is known. So in this example, it could use R1 to ask the user if Socrates was a Man and then use that new information accordingly.\nThe use of rules to explicitly represent knowledge also enabled explanation abilities. In the simple example above if the system had used R1 to assert that Socrates was Mortal and a user wished to understand why Socrates was mortal they could query the system and the system would look back at the rules which fired to cause the assertion and present those rules to the user as an explanation. In English, if the user asked \"Why is Socrates Mortal?\" the system would reply \"Because all men are mortal and Socrates is a man\". A significant area for research was the generation of explanations from the knowledge base in natural English rather than simply by showing the more formal but less intuitive rules.\nAs expert systems evolved, many new techniques were incorporated into various types of inference engines. Some of the most important of these were:\nAdvantages.\nThe goal of knowledge-based systems is to make the critical information required for the system to work explicit rather than implicit. In a traditional computer program, the logic is embedded in code that can typically only be reviewed by an IT specialist. With an expert system, the goal was to specify the rules in a format that was intuitive and easily understood, reviewed, and even edited by domain experts rather than IT experts. The benefits of this explicit knowledge representation were rapid development and ease of maintenance.\nEase of maintenance is the most obvious benefit. This was achieved in two ways. First, by removing the need to write conventional code, many of the normal problems that can be caused by even small changes to a system could be avoided with expert systems. Essentially, the logical flow of the program (at least at the highest level) was simply a given for the system, simply invoke the inference engine. This also was a reason for the second benefit: rapid prototyping. With an expert system shell it was possible to enter a few rules and have a prototype developed in days rather than the months or year typically associated with complex IT projects.\nA claim for expert system shells that was often made was that they removed the need for trained programmers and that experts could develop systems themselves. In reality, this was seldom if ever true. While the rules for an expert system were more comprehensible than typical computer code, they still had a formal syntax where a misplaced comma or other character could cause havoc as with any other computer language. Also, as expert systems moved from prototypes in the lab to deployment in the business world, issues of integration and maintenance became far more critical. Inevitably demands to integrate with, and take advantage of, large legacy databases and systems arose. To accomplish this, integration required the same skills as any other type of system.\nSumming up the benefits of using expert systems, the following can be highlighted:\nDisadvantages.\nThe most common disadvantage cited for expert systems in the academic literature is the knowledge acquisition problem. Obtaining the time of domain experts for any software application is always difficult, but for expert systems it was especially difficult because the experts were by definition highly valued and in constant demand by the organization. As a result of this problem, a great deal of research in the later years of expert systems was focused on tools for knowledge acquisition, to help automate the process of designing, debugging, and maintaining rules defined by experts. However, when looking at the life-cycle of expert systems in actual use, other problems \u2013 essentially the same problems as those of any other large system \u2013 seem at least as critical as knowledge acquisition: integration, access to large databases, and performance.\nPerformance could be especially problematic because early expert systems were built using tools (such as earlier Lisp versions) that interpreted code expressions without first compiling them. This provided a powerful development environment, but with the drawback that it was virtually impossible to match the efficiency of the fastest compiled languages (such as C). System and database integration were difficult for early expert systems because the tools were mostly in languages and platforms that were neither familiar to nor welcome in most corporate IT environments \u2013 programming languages such as Lisp and Prolog, and hardware platforms such as Lisp machines and personal computers. As a result, much effort in the later stages of expert system tool development was focused on integrating with legacy environments such as COBOL and large database systems, and on porting to more standard platforms. These issues were resolved mainly by the client\u2013server paradigm shift, as PCs were gradually accepted in the IT environment as a legitimate platform for serious business system development and as affordable minicomputer servers provided the processing power needed for AI applications.\nAnother major challenge of expert systems emerges when the size of the knowledge base increases. This causes the processing complexity to increase. For instance, when an expert system with 100 million rules was envisioned as the ultimate expert system, it became obvious that such system would be too complex and it would face too many computational problems. An inference engine would have to be able to process huge numbers of rules to reach a decision.\nHow to verify that decision rules are consistent with each other is also a challenge when there are too many rules. Usually such problem leads to a satisfiability (SAT) formulation. This is a well-known NP-complete problem Boolean satisfiability problem. If we assume only binary variables, say n of them, and then the corresponding search space is of size 2formula_2. Thus, the search space can grow exponentially.\nThere are also questions on how to prioritize the use of the rules to operate more efficiently, or how to resolve ambiguities (for instance, if there are too many else-if sub-structures within one rule) and so on.\nOther problems are related to the overfitting and overgeneralization effects when using known facts and trying to generalize to other cases not described explicitly in the knowledge base. Such problems exist with methods that employ machine learning approaches too.\nAnother problem related to the knowledge base is how to make updates of its knowledge quickly and effectively. Also how to add a new piece of knowledge (i.e., where to add it among many rules) is challenging. Modern approaches that rely on machine learning methods are easier in this regard.\nBecause of the above challenges, it became clear that new approaches to AI were required instead of rule-based technologies. These new approaches are based on the use of machine learning techniques, along with the use of feedback mechanisms.\nThe key challenges that expert systems in medicine (if one considers computer-aided diagnostic systems as modern expert systems), and perhaps in other application domains, include issues related to aspects such as: big data, existing regulations, healthcare practice, various algorithmic issues, and system assessment.\nFinally, the following disadvantages of using expert systems can be summarized:\nApplications.\nHayes-Roth divides expert systems applications into 10 categories illustrated in the following table. The example applications were not in the original Hayes-Roth table, and some of them arose well afterward. Any application that is not footnoted is described in the Hayes-Roth book. Also, while these categories provide an intuitive framework to describe the space of expert systems applications, they are not rigid categories, and in some cases an application may show traits of more than one category.\nHearsay was an early attempt at solving voice recognition through an expert systems approach. For the most part this category of expert systems was not all that successful. Hearsay and all interpretation systems are essentially pattern recognition systems\u2014looking for patterns in noisy data. In the case of Hearsay recognizing phonemes in an audio stream. Other early examples were analyzing sonar data to detect Russian submarines. These kinds of systems proved much more amenable to a neural network AI solution than a rule-based approach.\nCADUCEUS and MYCIN were medical diagnosis systems. The user describes their symptoms to the computer as they would to a doctor and the computer returns a medical diagnosis.\nDendral was a tool to study hypothesis formation in the identification of organic molecules. The general problem it solved\u2014designing a solution given a set of constraints\u2014was one of the most successful areas for early expert systems applied to business domains such as salespeople configuring Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) VAX computers and mortgage loan application development.\nSMH.PAL is an expert system for the assessment of students with multiple disabilities.\nGARVAN-ES1 was a medical expert system, developed at the Garvan Institute of Medical Research, that provided automated clinical diagnostic comments on endocrine reports from a pathology laboratory. It was one of the first medical expert systems to go into routine clinical use internationally and the first expert system to be used for diagnosis daily in Australia. The system was written in \"C\" and ran on a PDP-11 in 64K of memory. It had 661 rules that were compiled; not interpreted.\nMistral is an expert system to monitor dam safety, developed in the 1990s by Ismes (Italy). It gets data from an automatic monitoring system and performs a diagnosis of the state of the dam. Its first copy, installed in 1992 on the Ridracoli Dam (Italy), is still operational 24/7/365. It has been installed on several dams in Italy and abroad (e.g., Itaipu Dam in Brazil), and on landslide sites under the name of Eydenet, and on monuments under the name of Kaleidos. Mistral is a registered trade mark of CESI."}
{"id": "10137", "revid": "29210", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10137", "title": "Evolution of an idea", "text": ""}
{"id": "10138", "revid": "38934791", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10138", "title": "Earl of Abercorn", "text": ""}
{"id": "10139", "revid": "1728614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10139", "title": "Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford", "text": "Edward de\u00a0Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford (; 12 April 155024 June 1604), was an English peer and courtier of the Elizabethan era. Oxford was heir to the second oldest earldom in the kingdom, a court favourite for a time, a sought-after patron of the arts, and noted by his contemporaries as a lyric poet and court playwright, but his volatile temperament precluded him from attaining any courtly or governmental responsibility and contributed to the dissipation of his estate.\nEdward de Vere was the only son of John de Vere, 16th Earl of Oxford, and Margery Golding. After the death of his father in 1562, he became a ward of Queen Elizabeth I and was sent to live in the household of her principal advisor, Sir William Cecil. He married Cecil's daughter, Anne, with whom he had five children. Oxford was estranged from her for five years and refused to acknowledge he was the father of their first child.\nA champion jouster, Oxford travelled widely throughout France and the many states of Italy. He was among the first to compose love poetry at the Elizabethan court and was praised as a playwright, though none of the plays known as his survive. A stream of dedications praised Oxford for his generous patronage of literary, religious, musical, and medical works, and he patronised both adult and boy acting companies, as well as musicians, tumblers, acrobats and performing animals.\nHe fell out of favour with the Queen in the early 1580s and was exiled from court and briefly imprisoned in the Tower of London when his mistress, Anne Vavasour, one of Elizabeth's maids of honour, gave birth to his son in the palace. Vavasour was also incarcerated and the affair instigated violent street brawls between Oxford and her kinsmen. He was reconciled to the Queen in May 1583 at Theobalds, but all opportunities for advancement had been lost. In 1586, the Queen granted Oxford \u00a31,000 annually (\u00a3274,359 in 2024) to relieve the financial distress caused by his extravagance and the sale of his income-producing lands for ready money. After the death of his first wife, Anne Cecil, Oxford married Elizabeth Trentham, one of the Queen's maids of honour, with whom he had an heir, Henry de Vere, Viscount Bulbeck (later 18th Earl of Oxford). Oxford died in 1604, having spent the entirety of his inherited estates.\nSince the 1920s, Oxford has been among the most prominent alternative candidates proposed for the authorship of Shakespeare's works.\nFamily and childhood.\nEdward de\u00a0Vere was born heir to the second-oldest extant earldom in England at the de\u00a0Vere ancestral home, Hedingham Castle, in Essex, northeast of London. He was the only son of John de Vere, 16th Earl of Oxford, and his second wife, Margery Golding and was probably named to honour Edward VI, from whom he received a gilded christening cup. He had an older half-sister, Katherine, the child of his father's first marriage to Dorothy Neville, and a younger sister, Mary de Vere. Both his parents had established court connections: the 16th Earl accompanying Princess Elizabeth from her house arrest at Hatfield to the throne, and the countess being appointed a maid of honour in 1559.\nBefore his father's death, Edward de\u00a0Vere was styled \"Viscount Bulbeck\", or \"Bolebec\", and was raised in the English reformed faith. Like many children of the nobility, he was raised by surrogate parents, in his case in the household of Sir Thomas Smith. At eight he entered Queens' College, Cambridge, as an \"impubes\", or immature fellow-commoner, later transferring to St\u00a0John's. Thomas Fowle, a former fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, was paid \u00a310 annually as de\u00a0Vere's tutor.\nHis father died on 3 August 1562, shortly after making his will. Because he held lands from the Crown by knight service, his son became a royal ward of the Queen and was placed in the household of Sir William Cecil, her secretary of state and chief advisor. At 12, de\u00a0Vere had become the 17th\u00a0Earl of Oxford, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, and heir to an estate whose annual income, though assessed at approximately \u00a32,500, may have run as high as \u00a33,500 (\u00a3 as of ).\nWardship.\nWhile living at the Cecil House, Oxford's daily studies consisted of dancing instruction, French, Latin, cosmography, writing exercises, drawing, and common prayers. During his first year at Cecil House, he was briefly tutored by Laurence Nowell, the antiquarian and Anglo-Saxon scholar. In a letter to Cecil, Nowell explains: \"I clearly see that my work for the Earl of Oxford cannot be much longer required\", and his departure after eight\u00a0months has been interpreted as either a sign of the thirteen-year-old Oxford's intractability as a pupil, or an indication that his precocity surpassed Nowell's ability to instruct him. In May\u00a01564 Arthur Golding, in his dedication to his \"Th' Abridgement of the Histories of Trogus Pompeius\", attributed to his young nephew an interest in ancient history and contemporary events.\nIn 1563, Oxford's older half-sister, Katherine, then Lady Windsor, challenged the legitimacy of the marriage of de\u00a0Vere's parents in the Ecclesiastical court. His uncle Golding argued that the Archbishop of Canterbury should halt the proceedings since a proceeding against a ward of the Queen could not be brought without prior licence from the Court of Wards and Liveries.\nSome time before October\u00a01563, Oxford's mother married secondly Charles Tyrrell, a Gentleman Pensioner. In May\u00a01565 she wrote to Cecil, urging that the money from family properties set aside by Oxford's father's will for his use during his minority should be entrusted to herself and other family friends, to protect it and to ensure that Oxford would be able to meet the expenses of furnishing his household and suing his livery when he reached his majority; this last would end his wardship, through cancelling his debt with the Court of Wards, and convey to him the powers attached to his titles. There is no evidence that Cecil ever replied to her request. She died three years later, and was buried beside her first husband at Earls Colne. Oxford's stepfather, Charles Tyrrell, died in March 1570.\nIn August\u00a01564 Oxford was among 17\u00a0noblemen, knights, and esquires in the Queen's entourage who were awarded the honorary degree of Master of Arts by the University of Cambridge, and he was awarded another by the University of Oxford on a Royal progress in 1566. His future father-in-law, William Cecil, also received honorary degrees of Master of Arts on the same progresses. There is no evidence that Oxford ever received a Bachelor of Arts degree. In February\u00a01567 he was admitted to Gray's Inn to study law.\nOn 23 July 1567, while practising fencing in the backyard of Cecil House in the Strand, the seventeen-year-old Oxford killed Thomas Brincknell, an under-cook in the Cecil household. At the coroner's inquest the next day, the jury, which included Oxford's servant, and Cecil's prot\u00e9g\u00e9, the future historian Raphael Holinshed, found that Brincknell, drunk, had deliberately committed suicide by running onto Oxford's blade. As a suicide, he was not buried in consecrated ground, and all his worldly possessions were confiscated, leaving his pregnant wife destitute. She delivered a stillborn child shortly after Brinknell's death. Cecil later wrote that he attempted to have the jury find that Oxford had acted in self-defence.\nRecords of books purchased for Oxford in 1569 attest to his continued interest in history, as well as literature and philosophy. Among them were editions of a gilt Geneva Bible, Chaucer, Plutarch, two books in Italian, and folio editions of Cicero and Plato. In the same year Thomas Underdown dedicated his translation of the \"\u00c6thiopian History\" of Heliodorus to Oxford, praising his 'haughty courage', 'great skill' and 'sufficiency of learning'. In the winter of 1570, Oxford made the acquaintance of the mathematician and astrologer John Dee and became interested in occultism, studying magic and conjuring.\nIn 1569, Oxford received his first vote for membership in the Order of the Garter, but never attained the honour in spite of his high rank and office. In November of that year, Oxford petitioned Cecil for a foreign military posting. Although the Roman Catholic Revolt of the Northern Earls had broken out that year, Elizabeth refused to grant the request. Cecil eventually obtained a position for Oxford under the Earl of Sussex in a Scottish campaign the following spring. He and Sussex became staunch mutual supporters at court.\nComing of age.\nOn 12 April 1571, Oxford attained his majority and took his seat in the House of Lords. Great expectations attended his coming of age; Sir\u00a0George Buck recalled predictions that 'he was much more like ... to acquire a new erldome then to wast &amp; lose an old erldom', a prophecy that was never fulfilled.\nAlthough formal certification of his freedom from Burghley's control was deferred until May\u00a01572, Oxford was finally granted the income of \u00a3666 which his father had intended him to have earlier, but properties set aside to pay his father's debts would not come his way for another decade. During his minority as the Queen's ward, one-third of his estate had already reverted to the Crown, much of which Elizabeth had long since settled on Robert Dudley. Elizabeth demanded a further payment of \u00a33,000 for overseeing the wardship and a further \u00a34,000 for suing his livery. Oxford pledged double the amount if he failed to pay when it fell due, effectively risking a total obligation of \u00a321,000.\nBy 1571, Oxford was a court favourite of Elizabeth's. In May, he participated in the three-day tilt, tourney and barrier at which, although he did not win, he was given chief honours in celebration of the attainment of his majority, his prowess winning admiring comments from spectators. In August, Oxford attended Paul de Foix, who had come to England to negotiate a marriage between the Protestant Queen Elizabeth and the Catholic Prince Fran\u00e7ois de France, duc d'Anjou, the youngest brother of King Henry III of France of the House of Valois-Angoul\u00eame. The marriage had been proposed in 1572 as part of the negotiations between England and France to break the power of Spain. In November 1579 the husband of Oxford's first cousin Anne Vere, John Stubbs, and William Page had their right hand publicly cut off for the pamphlet critical of the Queen's proposed marriage to Prince Fran\u00e7ois and therefore judged seditious.\nOxford's published poetry dates from this period and, along with Edward Dyer he was one of the first courtiers to introduce vernacular verse to the court.\nMarriage.\nIn 1562, the 16th Earl of Oxford had contracted with Henry Hastings, 3rd Earl of Huntingdon, for his son Edward to marry one of Huntingdon's sisters; when he reached the age of eighteen, he was to choose either Elizabeth or Mary Hastings. However, after the death of the 16th Earl, the indenture was allowed to lapse. Elizabeth Hastings later married Edward Somerset, while Mary Hastings died unmarried.\nIn the summer of 1571, Oxford declared an interest in Cecil's 14\u00a0year-old daughter, Anne, and received the queen's consent to the marriage. Anne had been pledged to Philip Sidney two years earlier, but after a year of negotiations Sidney's father, Sir Henry, was declining in the Queen's favour and Cecil suspected financial difficulties. In addition, Cecil had been elevated to the peerage as Lord Burghley in February\u00a01571, thus elevating his daughter's rank, so the negotiations were cancelled. Cecil was displeased with the arrangement, given his daughter's age compared to Oxford's, and had entertained the idea of marrying her to the Earl of Rutland instead. The marriage was deferred until Anne was fifteen and finally took place at the Palace of Whitehall on 16 December 1571, in a triple wedding with that of Lady\u00a0Elizabeth Hastings and Edward Somerset, Lord Herbert, and Edward Sutton, 4th Baron Dudley and bride, Mary Howard, with the Queen in attendance. \nThe tying of two young English noblemen of great fortune into Protestant families was not lost on Elizabeth's Catholic enemies. Burghley gave Oxford for his daughter's dowry land worth \u00a3800, and a cash settlement of \u00a33,000. This amount was equal to Oxford's livery fees and was probably intended to be used as such, but the money vanished without a trace.\nOxford assigned Anne a jointure of some \u00a3669, but even though he was of age and a married man, he was still not in possession of his inheritance. After finally paying the Crown the \u00a34,000 it demanded for his livery, he was finally licensed to enter on his lands in May 1572. He was entitled to yearly revenues from his estates and the office of Lord Great Chamberlain of approximately \u00a32,250, but he was not entitled to the income from his mother's jointure until after her death, nor to the income from certain estates set aside until 1583 to pay his father's debts. In addition, the fines assessed against Oxford in the Court of Wards for his wardship, marriage, and livery already totalled some \u00a33,306. To guarantee payment, he entered into bonds to the Court totalling \u00a311,000, and two further private bonds for \u00a36,000 apiece.\nIn 1572, Oxford's first cousin and closest relative, the Duke of Norfolk, was found guilty of a Catholic conspiracy against Elizabeth and was executed for treason. Oxford had earlier petitioned both the Queen and Burghley on the condemned Norfolk's behalf, to no avail, and it was claimed in a \"murky petition from an unidentified woman\" that he had plotted to provide a ship to assist his cousin's escape attempt to Spain.\nThe following summer, Oxford planned to travel to Ireland; at this point, his debts were estimated at a minimum of \u00a36,000.\nIn the summer of 1574, Elizabeth admonished Oxford \"for his unthriftyness\", and on 1 July he bolted to the continent without permission, travelling to Calais with Lord Edward Seymour, and then to Flanders, \"carrying a great sum of money with him\". Coming as it did during a time of expected hostilities with Spain, Mary, Queen of Scots, interpreted his flight as an indication of his Catholic sympathies, as did the Catholic rebels then living on the continent. Burghley, however, assured the queen that Oxford was loyal, and she sent two Gentlemen Pensioners to summon him back, under threat of heavy penalties. Oxford returned to England by the end of the month and was in London on the 28th. His request for a place on the Privy Council was rejected, but the queen's anger was abated and she promised him a licence to travel to Paris, Germany, and Italy on his pledge of good behaviour.\nForeign travel.\nIn January 1575 Elizabeth issued a licence to Oxford to travel, and provided him with letters of introduction to foreign monarchs. Prior to his departure, he entered into two indentures. In the first contract, he sold his manors in Cornwall, Staffordshire and Wiltshire to three trustees for \u00a36,000. \nIn the second, to prevent his estates passing by default to his sister Mary in the event of his dying abroad without heirs, he entailed the lands of the earldom on his first cousin, Hugh Vere. The indenture also provided for payment of debts amounting to \u00a39,096, \u00a33,457 of which was still owed to the Queen as expenses for his wardship.\nOxford left England in the first week of February 1575, and a month later was presented to the King and Queen of France. News that his new wife, Anne, was pregnant had reached him in Paris, and he sent her many extravagant presents in the coming months. But somewhere along the way, his mind was poisoned against Anne and the Cecils, and he became convinced that the expected child was not his. The elder Cecils loudly voiced their outrage at the rumours, which probably worsened the situation. In mid-March he travelled to Strasbourg, and then made his way to Venice, via Milan. Although his daughter, Elizabeth, was born at the beginning of July, for unexplained reasons Oxford did not learn of her birth until late September.\nOxford remained in Italy for a year, during which he was evidently captivated by Italian fashions in clothing, jewellery and cosmetics. He is recorded by John Stow as having introduced various Italian luxury items to the English court which immediately became fashionable, such as embroidered or trimmed scented gloves. Elizabeth had a pair of decorated gloves scented with perfume that for many years was known as the \"Earl of Oxford's perfume\". Lacking evidence, his interest in higher Italian culture, its literature, music and visual art, is less sure. His only recorded judgement about the country itself was unenthusiastic. In a letter to Burghley he wrote, \".\"\nIn January\u00a01576 Oxford wrote to Lord Burghley from Siena about complaints that had reached him about his creditors' demands, which included the Queen and his sister, and directing that more of his land be sold to pay them. He left Venice in March, intending to return home by way of Lyons and Paris; although one later report has him as far south as Palermo in Sicily. At this point the Italian financier Benedict Spinola had lent Oxford over \u00a34,000 for his 15-month-long continental tour, while in England over a hundred tradesmen were seeking settlement of debts totalling thousands of pounds.\nOn Oxford's return across the Channel in April 1576, his ship was seized by pirates from Flushing, who took his possessions, stripped him to his shirt, and might have murdered him had not one of them recognized him.\nQuarrels, plots and scandals.\nOxford had sold his inherited lands in Cornwall, Staffordshire, and Wiltshire prior to his continental tour. On his return to England in 1576 he sold his manors in Devonshire; by the end of 1578 he had sold at least seven more.\nAlso upon his return, Oxford refused to live with his wife and took rooms at Charing Cross. Aside from the unspoken suspicion that Elizabeth was not his child, Burghley's papers reveal a flood of bitter complaints by Oxford against the Cecil family. Upon the Queen's request, he allowed his wife to attend the Queen at court, but only when he was not present, and he insisted that she not attempt to speak to him. He also stipulated that Burghley must make no further appeals to him on Anne's behalf. He was estranged from Anne for five\u00a0years.\nIn February\u00a01577 it was rumoured that Oxford's sister Mary would marry Lord Gerald Fitzgerald (1559\u20131580), but by 2 July her name was linked with that of Peregrine Bertie, later Lord Willoughby d'Eresby. Bertie's mother, the Duchess of Suffolk, wrote to Lord Burghley that \"my wise son has gone very far with my Lady Mary Vere, I fear too far to turn\". Both the Duchess and her husband Richard Bertie first opposed the marriage, and the Queen initially withheld her consent. Oxford's own opposition to the match was so vehement that for some time Mary's prospective husband feared for his life. On 15 December the Duchess of Suffolk wrote to Burghley describing a plan she and Mary had devised to arrange a meeting between Oxford and his daughter. Whether the scheme came to fruition is unknown. Mary and Bertie were married sometime before March of the following year.\nIn 1577 Oxford invested \u00a325 in the second of Martin Frobisher's expeditions in search of the Northwest Passage. In July\u00a01577, he asked the Crown for the grant of Castle Rising, which had been forfeited to the Crown due to his cousin Norfolk's attainder in 1572. As soon as it was granted to him, he sold it, along with two other manors, and sank some \u00a33,000 into Frobisher's third expedition. The 'gold' ore brought back turned out to be worthless, and Oxford lost the entire investment.\nIn the summer of 1578, Oxford attended the Queen's progress through East Anglia. The royal party stayed at Lord Henry Howard's residence at Audley End. A contretemps occurred during the progress in mid-August when the Queen twice asked Oxford to dance before the French ambassadors, who were in England to negotiate a marriage between the 46-year-old English queen and the younger brother of Henri\u00a0III of France, the 24\u00a0year-old Duke of Anjou. Oxford refused, on the grounds that he \"would not give pleasure to Frenchmen\".\nIn April 1578, the Spanish ambassador, Bernardino de\u00a0Mendoza, had written to King\u00a0Philip II of Spain that it had been proposed that if Anjou were to travel to England to negotiate his marriage to the Queen, Oxford, Surrey, and Windsor should be hostages for his safe return. Anjou himself did not arrive in England until the end of August, but his ambassadors were already in England. Oxford was sympathetic to the proposed marriage; Leicester and his nephew Philip Sidney were adamantly opposed to it. This antagonism may have triggered the famous quarrel between Oxford and Sidney on the tennis court at Whitehall. It is not entirely clear who was playing on the court when the fight erupted; what is undisputed is that Oxford called Sidney a 'puppy', while Sidney responded that \"all the world knows puppies are gotten by dogs, and children by men\". The French ambassadors, whose private galleries overlooked the tennis court, were witness to the display. Whether it was Sidney who next challenged Oxford to a duel or the other way around, the matter was not taken further, and the Queen personally took Sidney to task for not recognizing the difference between his status and Oxford's. Christopher Hatton and Sidney's friend Hubert Languet also tried to dissuade Sidney from pursuing the matter, and it was eventually dropped. The specific cause is not known, but in January\u00a01580 Oxford wrote and challenged Sidney; by the end of the month Oxford was confined by the Queen to his chambers, and was not released until early February.\nOxford openly quarrelled with the Earl of Leicester at about this time; he was confined to his chamber at Greenwich for some time 'about the libelling between him and my Lord of Leicester'. In the summer of 1580, Gabriel Harvey, apparently motivated by a desire to ingratiate himself with Leicester, satirized Oxford's love for things Italian in verses entitled \"Speculum Tuscanismi\" and in \"Three Proper and Witty Familiar Letters\".\nAlthough details are unclear, there is evidence that in 1577 Oxford attempted to leave England to see service in the French Wars of Religion on the side of King\u00a0Henry III. Like many members of older established aristocratic families in England, he inclined to Roman Catholicism; and after his return from Italy, he was reported to have embraced the religion, perhaps after a distant kinsman, Charles Arundell, introduced him to a seminary priest named Richard Stephens. But just as quickly, by late in 1580 he had denounced a group of Catholics, among them Arundell, Francis Southwell, and Henry Howard, for treasonous activities and asking the Queen's mercy for his own, now repudiated, Catholicism. Elizabeth characteristically delayed in acting on the matter and Oxford was detained under house arrest for a short time.\nLeicester is credited by author Alan H. Nelson with having \"dislodged Oxford from the pro-French group\", i.e., the group at court which favoured Elizabeth's marriage to the Duke of Anjou. The Spanish ambassador, Mendoza, was also of the view that Leicester was behind Oxford's informing on his fellow Catholics in an attempt to prevent the French marriage. Peck concurs, stating that Leicester was \"intent upon rendering Sussex's allies politically useless\".\nThe Privy Council ordered the arrest of both Howard and Arundel; Oxford immediately met secretly with Arundell to convince him to support his allegations against Howard and Southwell, offering him money and a pardon from the Queen. Arundell refused this offer, and he and Howard initially sought asylum with Mendoza. Only after being assured that they would be placed under house arrest in the home of a Privy Councillor, did the pair give themselves up. During the first weeks after their arrest they pursued a threefold strategy: they would admit to minor crimes, attempt to prove Oxford a liar by his offers of money to testify to his accusations, and try to demonstrate that their accuser posed the real danger to the Crown. Their allegations against Oxford included atheism, lying, heresy, disobedience to the crown, treason, murder for hire, sexual perversion, habitual drunkenness, vowing to murder various courtiers, and criticizing the Queen for doing \"everything with the worst grace that ever woman did.\"\nMost seriously, Howard and Arundell charged Oxford with serial child rape, claiming he'd abused \"so many boyes it must nedes come out.\" Detailed testimony from nearly a dozen victims and witnesses substantiated the charge and included names, dates, and places. Two of the six boys named had sought help from adults after Oxford raped them violently and denied them medical care. A young cook named Powers reported being subjected to multiple assaults at Hampton Court in the winter of 1577\u201378, at Whitehall, and in Oxford's Broad Street home. Orazio Coquo's account is well documented outside the Howard-Arundel report. In testimony to the Venetian Inquisition dated 27 August 1577, Coquo explained that he was singing in the choir at Venice's Santa Maria Formosa on 1 March 1576 when Oxford invited him to work in England as his page. Then 15, the boy sought his parents' advice and departed Venice just 4 days later. Coquo arrived with Oxford in Dover on 20 April 1576 and fled 11 months later on 20 March 1577, aided by a Milanese merchant who gave him 25 ducats for the journey: He \"told me that I would be corrupted if I remained,\" Orazio testified, \"and he didn't want me to stay there any longer.\" When asked whether he sought Oxford's permission before leaving, the boy replied, \"Sirs, no, because he would not have allowed me to leave.\"\nArundell and Howard cleared themselves of Oxford's accusations, although Howard remained under house arrest into August, while Arundell was not freed until October or November. None of the three was ever indicted or tried. Neither Arundell nor Howard ever returned to court favour, and after the Throckmorton Plot of 1583 in support of Mary, Queen of Scots, Arundell fled to Paris with Thomas, Lord Paget, the elder brother of the conspirator Charles Paget. In the meantime, Oxford won a tournament at Westminster on 22 January. His page's speech at the tournament, describing Oxford's appearance as the Knight of the Tree of the Sun, was published in 1592 in a pamphlet entitled \"Plato, Axiochus\".\nOn 14 April 1589 Oxford was among the peers who found Philip Howard, Earl of Arundel, the eldest son and heir of Oxford's cousin, Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, guilty of treason; Arundel later died in prison. Oxford later insisted that \"the Howards were the most treacherous race under heaven\" and that \"my Lord Howard [was] the worst villain that lived in this earth.\"\nDuring the early 1580s, it is likely that the Earl of Oxford lived mainly at one of his Essex country houses, Wivenhoe, which was sold in 1584. In June\u00a01580 he purchased a tenement and seven acres of land near Aldgate in London from the Italian merchant Benedict Spinola for \u00a32,500. The property, located in the parish of St\u00a0Botolphs, was known as the Great Garden of Christchurch and had formerly belonged to Magdalene College, Cambridge. He also purchased a London residence, a mansion in Bishopsgate known as Fisher's Folly. According to Henry Howard, Oxford paid a large sum for the property and renovations to it.\nOn 23 March 1581 Sir Francis Walsingham advised the Earl of Huntingdon that two\u00a0days earlier Anne Vavasour, one of the Queen's maids of honour, had given birth to a son, and that \"the Earl of Oxford is avowed to be the father, who hath withdrawn himself with intent, as it is thought, to pass the seas\". Oxford was arrested and imprisoned in the Tower of London, as was Anne and her infant, who would later be known as Sir\u00a0Edward Vere. Burghley interceded for Oxford, and he was released from the Tower on 8 June, but he remained under house arrest until some time in July.\nWhile Oxford was under house arrest in May, Thomas Stocker dedicated to him his \"Divers Sermons of Master John Calvin\", stating in the dedication that he had been \"brought up in your Lordship's father's house\".\nOxford was still under house arrest in mid-July, but took part in an Accession Day tournament at Whitehall on 17 November 1581. He was then banished from court until June\u00a01583. He appealed to Burghley to intervene with the Queen on his behalf, but his father-in-law repeatedly put the matter in the hands of Sir\u00a0Christopher Hatton.\nAt Christmas 1581, Oxford was reconciled with his wife, Anne, but his affair with Anne Vavasour continued to have repercussions. In March\u00a01582 there was a skirmish in the streets of London between Oxford and Anne's uncle, Sir\u00a0Thomas Knyvet. Oxford was wounded, and his servant killed; reports conflict as to whether Knyvet was also injured. There was another fray between Knyvet's and Oxford's retinues on 18 June, and a third six\u00a0days later, when it was reported that Knyvet had \"slain a man of the Earl of Oxford's in fight\". In a letter to Burghley three\u00a0years later Oxford offered to attend his father-in-law at his house \"as well as a lame man might\"; it is possible his lameness was a result of injuries from that encounter. On 19 January 1585 Anne Vavasour's brother Thomas sent Oxford a written challenge; it appears to have been ignored.\nMeanwhile, the street brawling between factions continued. Another of Oxford's men was killed in January, and in March Burghley wrote to Sir\u00a0Christopher Hatton about the death of one of Knyvet's men, thanking Hatton for his efforts \"to bring some good end to these troublesome matters betwixt my Lord Oxford and Mr\u00a0Thomas Knyvet\".\nOn 6 May 1583, eighteen months after their reconciliation, Edward and Anne's only son was born, but died the same day. The infant was buried at Castle Hedingham three\u00a0days later.\nAfter intervention by Burghley and Sir Walter Raleigh, Oxford was reconciled to the Queen, and his two-year exile from court ended at the end of May on condition of his guarantee of good behaviour. However, he never regained his position as a courtier of the first magnitude.\nTheatrical enterprises.\nThe previous Earl of Oxford had maintained a company of players known as Oxford's Men, which was discontinued by the 17th Earl two\u00a0years after his father's death. Beginning in 1580, Oxford patronised both adult and boy companies and a company of musicians, and also sponsored performances by tumblers, acrobats, and performing animals. The new Oxford's Men toured the provinces between 1580 and 1587. Sometime after November\u00a01583, Oxford bought a sublease of the premises used by the boy companies in the Blackfriars, and then gave it to his secretary, the writer John Lyly. Lyly installed Henry Evans, a Welsh scrivener and theatrical affectionado, as the manager of the new company of Oxford's Boys, composed of the Children of the Chapel and the Children of Paul's, and turned his talents to playwriting until the end of June\u00a01584, when the original playhouse lease was voided by its owner. In 1584\u20131585, \"the Earl of Oxford's musicians\" received payments for performances in the cities of Oxford and Barnstaple. Oxford's Men (also known as Oxford's Players) stayed active until 1602.\nRoyal annuity.\nOn 6 April 1584, Oxford's daughter Bridget was born, and two works were dedicated to him, Robert Greene's \"Gwydonius; The Card of Fancy\", and John Southern's \"Pandora\". Verses in the latter work mention Oxford's knowledge of astronomy, history, languages, and music.\nOxford's financial situation was steadily deteriorating. At this point, he had sold almost all his inherited lands, which cut him off from what had been his principal source of income. Moreover, because the properties were security for his unpaid debt to the Queen in the Court of Wards, he had had to enter into a bond with the purchaser, guaranteeing that he would indemnify them if the Queen were to make a claim against the lands to collect on the debt. To avoid this eventuality, the purchasers of his estates agreed to pay Oxford's debt to the Court of Wards in instalments.\nIn 1585 negotiations were underway for King\u00a0James VI of Scotland to come to England to discuss the release of his mother, Mary, Queen of Scots, and in March Oxford was to be sent to Scotland as one of the hostages for James's safety.\nIn 1586, Oxford petitioned the Queen for an annuity to relieve his distressed financial situation. His father-in-law made him several large loans, and Elizabeth granted him a \u00a31,000 annuity, to be continued at her pleasure or until he could be provided for otherwise. This annuity was later continued by James\u00a0I. De\u00a0Vere's widow, Elizabeth, petitioned James\u00a0I for an annuity of \u00a3250 on behalf of her 11-year-old son, Henry, to continue the \u00a31,000 annuity granted to de\u00a0Vere. Henry was ultimately awarded a \u00a3200 annuity for life. James I would continue the grant after her death.\nAnother daughter, Susan, was born on 26 May 1587. On 12 September, another daughter, Frances, is recorded as buried at Edmonton. Her birthdate is unknown; presumably, she was between one and three years of age.\nIn July Elizabeth granted the Earl property which had been seized from Edward Jones, who had been executed for his role in the Babington Plot. In order to protect the land from Oxford's creditors, the grant was made in the name of two trustees. At the end of November it was agreed that the purchasers of Oxford's lands would pay his entire debt of some \u00a33,306 due to the Court of Wards over a five-year period, finishing in 1592.\nIn July and August\u00a01588 England was threatened by the Spanish Armada. On 28 July Leicester, who was in overall command of the English land troops, asked for instructions regarding Oxford, stating that \"he seems most willing to hazard his life in this quarrel\". The Earl was offered the governorship of the port of Harwich, but he thought it was unworthy and declined the post; Leicester was glad to be rid of him.\nIn December\u00a01588 Oxford had secretly sold his London mansion \"Fisher's Folly\" to Sir\u00a0William Cornwallis; by January\u00a01591 the author Thomas Churchyard was dealing with rent owing for rooms he had taken in a house on behalf of his patron. Oxford wrote to Burghley outlining a plan to purchase the manorial lands of Denbigh, in Wales, if the Queen would consent, offering to pay for them by commuting his \u00a31,000 annuity and agreeing to abandon his suit to regain the Forest of Essex (Waltham Forest), and to deed over his interests in Hedingham and Brets for the use of his children, who were living with Burghley under his guardianship.\nIn the spring of 1591, the plan for the purchasers of his land to discharge his debt to the Court of Wards was disrupted by the Queen's taking extents, or writs allowing a creditor to temporarily seize a debtor's property. Oxford complained that his servant Thomas Hampton had taken advantage of these writs by taking money from the tenants for his own use, and had also conspired with another of his servants to pass a fraudulent document under the Great Seal of England. The Lord Mayor, Thomas Skinner, was also involved. In June, Oxford wrote to Burghley reminding him that he had made an agreement with Elizabeth to relinquish his claim to the Forest of Essex for three reasons, one of which was the Queen's reluctance to punish Skinner's felony, which had caused Oxford to forfeit \u00a320,000 in bonds and statutes.\nIn 1586 Angel Day dedicated \"The English Secretary\", the first epistolary manual for writing model letters in English, to Oxford, and William Webbe praised him as \"most excellent among the rest\" of our poets in his \"Discourse of English Poetry\". In 1588 Anthony Munday dedicated to Oxford the two parts of his \"Palmerin d'Oliva\". The following year \"The Arte of English Poesie\", attributed to George Puttenham, placed Oxford among a \"crew\" of courtier poets; Puttenham also considered him among the best comic playwrights of the day. In 1590 Edmund Spenser addressed to Oxford the third of seventeen dedicatory sonnets which preface \"The Faerie Queene\", celebrating his patronage of poets. The composer John Farmer, who was in Oxford's service at the time, dedicated \"The First Set of Divers &amp; Sundry Ways of Two Parts in One\" to him in 1591, noting in the dedication his patron's love of music.\nRemarriage and later life.\nOn 5 June 1588 Oxford's wife Anne Cecil died at court of a fever; she was 31.\nOn 4 July 1591 Oxford sold the Great Garden property at Aldgate to John Wolley and Francis Trentham. The arrangement was stated to be for the benefit of Francis's sister, Elizabeth Trentham, one of the Queen's Maids of Honour, whom Oxford married later that year. On 24 February 1593, at Stoke Newington, she gave birth to his only surviving son, Henry de Vere, Viscount Bulbeck, who was his heir.\nBetween 1591 and 1592 Oxford disposed of the last of his large estates; Castle Hedingham, the seat of his earldom, went to Lord Burghley; it was held in trust for Oxford's three daughters by his first marriage. He commissioned his servant, Roger Harlakenden, to sell Colne Priory. Harlekenden contrived to undervalue the land, then purchase it (as well as other parcels that were not meant to be sold) under his son's name; the suits Oxford brought against Harlakenden for fraud dragged out for decades and were never settled in his lifetime.\nProtracted negotiations to arrange a match between his daughter Elizabeth and Henry Wriothesley, 3rd Earl of Southampton, did not result in marriage; on 19 November 1594, six\u00a0weeks after Southampton turned 21, 'the young Earl of Southampton, refusing the Lady\u00a0Vere, payeth \u00a35000 of present money'. In January Elizabeth married William Stanley, 6th Earl of Derby. Derby had promised Oxford his new bride would have \u00a31,000 a year, but the financial provision for her was slow in materializing.\nHis father-in-law, Lord\u00a0Burghley, died on 4 August 1598 at the age of 78, leaving substantial bequests to Oxford's two unmarried daughters, Bridget and Susan. The bequests were structured to prevent Oxford from gaining control of his daughters' inheritances by assuming custody of them.\nEarlier negotiations for a marriage to William Herbert having fallen through, in May or June\u00a01599 Oxford's 15\u00a0year-old daughter Bridget married Francis Norris. Susan married Philip Herbert, 4th Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery.\nFrom March to August\u00a01595 Oxford actively importuned the Queen, in competition with Lord Buckhurst, to operate the tin mines in Cornwall. He wrote to Burghley, enumerating years of fruitless attempts to amend his financial situation and complained: 'This last year past I have been a suitor to her Majesty that I might farm her tins, giving \u00a33000 a year more than she had made.' Oxford's letters and memoranda indicate that he pursued his suit into 1596, and renewed it again three\u00a0years later, but was ultimately unsuccessful in obtaining the tin monopoly.\nIn October\u00a01595, Oxford wrote to his brother-in-law, Sir\u00a0Robert Cecil, of friction between himself and the ill-fated Earl of Essex, partly over his claim to property, terming him 'the only person that I dare rely upon in the court'. Cecil seems to have done little to further Oxford's interests in the suit.\nIn March he was unable to go to court due to illness, in August he wrote to Burghley from Byfleet, where he had gone for his health: 'I find comfort in this air, but no fortune in the court.' In September, he again wrote of ill health, regretting he had not been able to pay attendance to the Queen. Two\u00a0months later Rowland Whyte wrote to Sir\u00a0Robert Sidney that 'Some say my Lord of Oxford is dead'. Whether the rumour of his death was related to the illness mentioned in his letters earlier in the year is unknown. Oxford attended his last Parliament in December, perhaps another indication of his failing health.\nOn 28 April 1599 Oxford was sued by the widow of his tailor for a debt of \u00a3500 for services rendered some two decades earlier. He claimed that not only had he paid the debt, but that the tailor had absconded with 'cloth of gold and silver and other stuff' belonging to him, worth \u00a3800. The outcome of the suit is unknown.\nIn July\u00a01600 Oxford wrote requesting Sir\u00a0Robert Cecil's help in securing an appointment as Governor of the Isle of Jersey, once again citing the Queen's unfulfilled promises to him. In February he again wrote for his support, this time for the office of President of Wales. As with his former suits, Oxford was again unsuccessful; during this time he was listed on the Pipe rolls as owing \u00a320 for the subsidy.\nAfter the abortive Essex rebellion in February\u00a01601, Oxford was 'the senior of the twenty-five noblemen' who rendered verdicts at the trials of Essex and Southampton for treason. After Essex's co-conspirator Sir Charles Danvers was executed in March, Oxford became a party to a complicated suit regarding lands which had reverted to the Crown by escheat at Danvers's attainder, a suit opposed by Danvers's kinsmen. De\u00a0Vere continued to suffer from ill health, which kept him from court. On 4 December, Oxford was shocked that Cecil, who had encouraged him to undertake the Danvers suit on the Crown's behalf, had now withdrawn his support for it. As with all his other suits aimed at improving his financial situation, this last of Oxford's suits to the Queen ended in disappointment.\nLast years.\nIn the early morning of 24 March 1603, Queen Elizabeth died without naming a successor. A few days beforehand, at his house at Hackney, Oxford had entertained the Earl of Lincoln, a nobleman known for erratic and violent behaviour similar to his host's. Lincoln reported that after dinner Oxford spoke of the Queen's impending death, claiming that the peers of England should decide the succession, and suggested that since Lincoln had 'a nephew of the blood royal ... Lord\u00a0Hastings', he should be sent to France to find allies to support this claim. Lincoln relayed this conversation to Sir John Peyton, Lieutenant of the Tower, who, knowing how physically and financially infirm Oxford was, refused to take Lincoln's report as a serious threat to King\u00a0James's accession.\nOxford expressed his grief at the late Queen's death, and his apprehension for the future. These fears were unfounded; in letters to Cecil in May and June\u00a01603 he again pressed his decades-long claim to have Waltham Forest (Forest of Essex) and the house and park of Havering restored to him, and on 18 July the new King granted his suit. On 25 July, Oxford was among those who officiated at the King's coronation, and a month later James confirmed his annuity of \u00a31,000.\nLong weakened by poor health, Oxford passed custody of the Forest of Essex to his son-in-law Francis Norris and his cousin Sir Francis Vere on 18 June 1604. He died on 24 June of unknown causes at King's Place, Hackney, and was buried on 6 July in the Hackney churchyard of St Augustine's (now the parish of St. John-at-Hackney). Oxford's death passed without public or private notice. His grave was still unmarked on 25 November 1612 when his widow Elizabeth Trentham signed her will. She asked \"to be buried in the Church of Hackney within the Countie of Middlesex, as neare vnto [unto] the bodie of my said late deare and noble lorde and husband as may bee,\" and she requested that \"there bee in the said Church erected for vs [us] a tombe fittinge our degree.\" The 18th Earl of Oxford failed to fulfil his mother's request, and the location of his parents' graves has been lost.\nLiterary reputation.\nOxford's manuscript verses circulated widely in courtly circles. Three of his poems, , , and , are among the texts that repeatedly appear in the surviving 16th-century manuscript miscellanies and poetical anthologies. His earliest published poem was in Thomas Bedingfield's translation of Cardano's \"Comforte\" (1573). Bedingfield's dedication to Oxford is dated 1 January 1572. In addition to his poem, Oxford also contributed a commendatory letter setting forth the reasons why Bedingfield should publish the work. \nIn 1576 eight of his poems were published in the poetry miscellany \"The Paradise of Dainty Devises\". According to the introduction, all the poems in the collection were meant to be sung, but Oxford's were almost the only genuine love songs in the collection. Oxford's was published in \"The Phoenix Nest\" (1593) and republished in \"England's Helicon\" (1600). appeared in \"The Teares of Fancie\" (1593). \"Brittons Bowre of Delight\" (1597) published under Oxford's name, but the attribution today is not considered certain.\nContemporary critics praised Oxford as a poet and a playwright. William Webbe names him as \"the most excellent\" of Elizabeth's courtier poets. Puttenham's \"The Arte of English Poesie\" (1589), places him first on a list of courtier poets and includes an excerpt from \"When wert thou born desire\" as an example of \"his excellance and wit\". Puttenham also says that \"highest praise\" should be given to Oxford and Richard Edwardes for \"Comedy and Enterlude\". Francis Meres' \"Palladis Tamia\" (1598) names Oxford first by social rank of 17\u00a0playwrights listed who are \"the best for comedy amongst us\", and he also appears first on a list of seven Elizabethan courtly poets \"who honoured Poesie with their pens and practice\" in Henry Peacham's 1622 \"The Compleat Gentleman\".\nSteven W. May writes that the Earl of Oxford was Elizabeth's \"first truly prestigious courtier poet ... [whose] precedent did at least confer genuine respectability upon the later efforts of such poets as Sidney, Greville, and Raleigh.\" He describes de\u00a0Vere as a \"competent, fairly experimental poet working in the established modes of mid-century lyric verse\" and his poetry as \"examples of the standard varieties of mid-Elizabethan amorous lyric\". May says that Oxford's youthful love lyrics, which have been described as experimental and innovative, \"create a dramatic break with everything known to have been written at the Elizabethan court up to that time\" by virtue of being lighter in tone and metre and more imaginative and free from the moralizing tone of the courtier poetry of the \"drab\" age, which tended to be occasional and instructive. and describes one poem, in which the author cries out against \"this loss of my good name\", as a \"defiant lyric without precedent in English Renaissance verse\".\n May says that Oxford's poetry was \"one man's contribution to the rhetorical mainstream of an evolving Elizabethan poetic\" indistinguishable from \"the output of his mediocre mid-century contemporaries\". However, C. S. Lewis wrote that his poetry shows \"a faint talent\", but is \"for the most part undistinguished and verbose.\" Nelson says that \"contemporary observers such as Harvey, Webbe, Puttenham, and Meres clearly exaggerated de\u00a0Vere's talent in deference to his rank. By any measure, his poems pale in comparison with those of Sidney, Lyly, Spenser, Shakespeare, Donne, and Jonson.\" He says that his known poems are \"astonishingly uneven\" in quality, ranging from the \"fine\" to the \"execrable\".\nOxford was sought after for his literary and theatrical patronage; between 1564 and 1599, twenty-eight works were dedicated to him by authors, including Arthur Golding, John Lyly, Robert Greene, and Anthony Munday. Of his 33\u00a0dedications, 13\u00a0appeared in original or translated works of literature, a higher percentage of literary works than other patrons of similar means. His lifelong patronage of writers, musicians, and actors prompted May to term Oxford \"a nobleman with extraordinary intellectual interests and commitments\", whose biography exhibits a \"lifelong devotion to learning\". He goes on to say that \"Oxford's genuine commitment to learning throughout his career lends a necessary qualification to Stone's conclusion that de\u00a0Vere simply squandered the more than 70,000\u00a0pounds he derived from selling off his patrimony ... for which some part of this amount de\u00a0Vere acquired a splendid reputation for nurture of the arts and sciences\".\nOxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship.\nThe Oxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship proposes that the Earl of Oxford wrote the plays and poems traditionally attributed to William Shakespeare. It was introduced by J. Thomas Looney, an English schoolmaster, in a book published in 1920. Though rejected by nearly all academic Shakespeareans, it has been among the most popular alternative Shakespeare authorship theories since the 1920s.\nThe Oxfordian theory was the central theme of the 2011 drama film \"Anonymous\".\nExternal links.\n \n "}
{"id": "10141", "revid": "1264366048", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10141", "title": "Erinyes", "text": "The Erinyes ( ; , \"Erinys\"), also known as the Eumenides (, the \"Gracious ones\") and commonly known in English as the Furies, are chthonic goddesses of vengeance in ancient Greek religion and mythology. A formulaic oath in the \"Iliad\" invokes them as \"the Erinyes, that under earth take vengeance on men, whosoever hath sworn a false oath\". Walter Burkert suggests that they are \"an embodiment of the act of self-cursing contained in the oath\". They correspond to the Dirae in Roman mythology. The Roman writer Maurus Servius Honoratus ( AD) wrote that they are called \"Eumenides\" in hell, \"Furiae\" on Earth, and \"Dirae\" in heaven. Erinyes are akin to some other Greek deities, called Poenai.\nAccording to Hesiod's \"Theogony\", when the Titan Cronus castrated his father, Uranus, and threw his genitalia into the sea, the Erinyes (along with the Giants and the Meliae) emerged from the drops of blood which fell on the Earth (Gaia), while Aphrodite was born from the crests of sea foam. Pseudo-Apollodorus also reports this lineage. According to variant accounts they are the daughters of Nyx (\"Night\"), while in Virgil's \"Aeneid\", they are daughters of Pluto (Hades) and Nox (Nyx). In some accounts, they were the daughters of Eurynome (a name for Earth) and Cronus, or of Earth and Phorcys (i.e. the sea). In Orphic literature, they are the daughters of Hades and Persephone.\nTheir number is usually left indeterminate. Virgil, probably working from an Alexandrian source, recognized three: Alecto or Alekto (\"endless anger\"), Megaera (\"jealous rage\"), and Tisiphone or Tilphousia (\"vengeful destruction\"), all of whom appear in the \"Aeneid\". Dante Alighieri followed Virgil in depicting the same three-character triptych of Erinyes; in Canto IX of the \"Inferno,\" they confront the poets at the gates of the city of Dis. Whilst the Erinyes were usually described as three maiden goddesses, the Erinys Telphousia was usually a byname for the wrathful goddess Demeter, who was worshipped under the title of Erinys in the Arkadian town of Thelpousa.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Erinyes\" is of uncertain etymology; connections with the verb \u1f40\u03c1\u03af\u03bd\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd \"orinein\", \"to raise, stir, excite\", and the noun \u1f14\u03c1\u03b9\u03c2 \"eris\", \"strife\" have been suggested; Robert Beekes suggests that the word probably has a Pre-Greek origin. The word \"Erinys\" in the singular and as a theonym is first attested in Mycenaean Greek, written in Linear B, in the following forms: , \"e-ri-nu\", and , \"e-ri-nu-we\". These words are found on the KN Fp 1, KN V 52, and KN Fh 390 tablets.\nDescription.\nThe Erinyes live in Erebus and are more ancient than any of the Olympian deities. Their task is to hear complaints brought by mortals against the insolence of the young to the aged, of children to parents, of hosts to guests, and of householders or city councils to suppliants\u2014and to punish such crimes by hounding culprits relentlessly. The appearance of the Erinyes differs between sources, though they are frequently described as wearing black. In Aesychlus' \"Eumenides,\" the Priestess of Pythian Apollo compares their monstrosity to that of the gorgon and harpies, but adds that they are wingless, with hatred dripping from their eyes. Euripides, on the other hand, gives them wings, as does Virgil. They are often envisaged as having snakes in their hair.\nThe Erinyes are commonly associated with night and darkness. With varying accounts claiming that they are the daughters of Nyx, the goddess of night, they're also associated with darkness in the works of Aeschylus and Euripides in both their physical appearance and the time of day that they manifest.\nDescription of Tisiphone in Statius' Thebaid:\nSo prayed he, and the cruel goddess turned her grim visage to hearken. By chance she sat beside dismal Cocytus, and had loosed the snakes from her head and suffered them to lap the sulphurous waters. Straightway, faster than fire of Jove or falling stars she leapt up from the gloomy bank: the crowd of phantoms gives way before her, fearing to meet their queen; then, journeying through the shadows and the fields dark with trooping ghosts, she hastens to the gate of Taenarus, whose threshold none may cross and again return. Day felt her presence, Night interposed her pitchy cloud and startled his shining steeds; far off towering Atlas shuddered and shifted the weight of heaven upon his trembling shoulders. Forthwith rising aloft from Malea\u2019s vale she hies her on the well-known way to Thebes: for on no errand is she swifter to go and to return, not kindred Tartarus itself pleases her so well. A hundred horned snakes erect shaded her face, the thronging terror of her awful head; deep within her sunken eyes there glows a light of iron hue, as when Atracian spells make travailing Phoebe redden through the clouds; suffused with venom, her skin distends and swells with corruption; a fiery vapour issues from her evil mouth, bringing upon mankind thirst unquenchable and sickness and famine and universal death. From her shoulders falls a stark and grisly robe, whose dark fastenings meet upon her breast: Atropos and Proserpine herself fashion her this garb anew. Then both her hands are shaken in wrath, the one gleaming with a funeral torch, the other lashing the air with a live water-snake.\nCult.\nPausanias describes a sanctuary in Athens dedicated to the Erinyes under the name Semnai:Hard by [the Areopagos the murder court of Athens] is a sanctuary of the goddesses which the Athenians call the August, but Hesiod in the Theogony calls them Erinyes (Furies). It was Aeschylus who first represented them with snakes in their hair. But on the images neither of these nor of any of the under-world deities is there anything terrible. There are images of Pluto, Hermes, and Earth, by which sacrifice those who have received an acquittal on the Hill of Ares; sacrifices are also offered on other occasions by both citizens and aliens. The \"Orphic Hymns\", a collection of 87 religious poems as translated by Thomas Taylor, contains two stanzas regarding the Erinyes. Hymn 68 refers to them as the Erinyes, while hymn 69 refers to them as the Eumenides.\nHymn 68, to the Erinyes:\nVociferous Bacchanalian Furies [Erinyes], hear! Ye, I invoke, dread pow'rs, whom all revere; Nightly, profound, in secret who retire, Tisiphone, Alecto, and Megara dire: Deep in a cavern merg'd, involv'd in night, near where Styx flows impervious to the sight; Ever attendant on mysterious rites, furious and fierce, whom Fate's dread law delights; Revenge and sorrows dire to you belong, hid in a savage veil, severe and strong, Terrific virgins, who forever dwell endu'd with various forms, in deepest hell; Aerial, and unseen by human kind, and swiftly coursing, rapid as the mind. In vain the Sun with wing'd refulgence bright, in vain the Moon, far darting milder light, Wisdom and Virtue may attempt in vain; and pleasing, Art, our transport to obtain Unless with these you readily conspire, and far avert your all-destructive ire. The boundless tribes of mortals you descry, and justly rule with Right's [Dike's] impartial eye. Come, snaky-hair'd, Fates [Moirai] many-form'd, divine, suppress your rage, and to our rites incline.Hymn 69, to the Eumenides:Hear me, illustrious Furies [Eumenides], mighty nam'd, terrific pow'rs, for prudent counsel fam'd; Holy and pure, from Jove terrestrial [Zeus Khthonios](Hades) born and Proserpine [Phersephone], whom lovely locks adorn: Whose piercing sight, with vision unconfin'd, surveys the deeds of all the impious kind: On Fate attendant, punishing the race (with wrath severe) of deeds unjust and base. Dark-colour'd queens, whose glittering eyes, are bright with dreadful, radiant, life-destroying, light: Eternal rulers, terrible and strong, to whom revenge, and tortures dire belong; Fatal and horrid to the human sight, with snaky tresses wand'ring in the night; Either approach, and in these rites rejoice, for ye, I call, with holy, suppliant voice.\nIn ancient Greek literature.\nMyth fragments dealing with the Erinyes are found among the earliest extant records of ancient Greek culture. The Erinyes are featured prominently in the myth of Orestes, which recurs frequently throughout many works of ancient Greek literature.\nAeschylus.\nFeatured in ancient Greek literature, from poems to plays, the Erinyes form the Chorus and play a major role in the conclusion of Aeschylus's dramatic trilogy the \"Oresteia\". In the first play, \"Agamemnon\", King Agamemnon returns home from the Trojan War, where he is slain by his wife, Clytemnestra, who wants vengeance for her daughter Iphigenia, whom Agamemnon had sacrificed to obtain favorable winds to sail to Troy. In the second play, \"The Libation Bearers\", their son Orestes has reached manhood and has been commanded by Apollo's oracle to avenge his father's murder at his mother's hand. Returning home and revealing himself to his sister Electra, Orestes pretends to be a messenger bringing the news of his own death to Clytemnestra. He then slays his mother and her lover Aegisthus. Although Orestes' actions were what Apollo had commanded him to do, Orestes has still committed matricide, a grave sacrilege. Because of this, he is pursued and tormented by the terrible Erinyes, who demand yet further blood vengeance.\nIn \"The Eumenides\", Orestes is told by Apollo at Delphi that he should go to Athens to seek the aid of the goddess Athena. In Athens, Athena arranges for Orestes to be tried by a jury of Athenian citizens, with her presiding. The Erinyes appear as Orestes' accusers, while Apollo speaks in his defense. The trial becomes a debate about the necessity of blood vengeance, the honor that is due to a mother compared to that due to a father, and the respect that must be paid to ancient deities such as the Erinyes compared to the newer generation of Apollo and Athena. The jury vote is evenly split. Athena participates in the vote and chooses for acquittal. Athena declares Orestes acquitted because of the rules she established for the trial. Despite the verdict, the Erinyes threaten to torment all inhabitants of Athens and to poison the surrounding countryside. Athena, however, offers the ancient goddesses a new role, as protectors of justice, rather than vengeance, and of the city. She persuades them to break the cycle of blood for blood (except in the case of war, which is fought for glory, not vengeance). While promising that the goddesses will receive due honor from the Athenians and Athena, she also reminds them that she possesses the key to the storehouse where Zeus keeps the thunderbolts that defeated the other older deities. This mixture of bribes and veiled threats satisfies the Erinyes, who are then led by Athena in a procession to their new abode. In the play, the \"Furies\" are thereafter addressed as \"Semnai\" (Venerable Ones), as they will now be honored by the citizens of Athens and ensure the city's prosperity.\nEuripides.\nIn Euripides' \"Orestes\" the Erinyes are for the first time \"equated\" with the Eumenides (\u0395\u1f50\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03af\u03b4\u03b5\u03c2, pl. of \u0395\u1f50\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03af\u03c2; literally \"the gracious ones\", but also translated as \"Kindly Ones\"). This is because it was considered unwise to mention them by name (for fear of attracting their attention); the ironic name is similar to how Hades, god of the dead is styled Pluton, or Pluto, \"the Rich One\". Using euphemisms for the names of deities serves many religious purposes."}
{"id": "10142", "revid": "48164832", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10142", "title": "Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair", "text": "Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, in the County of Aberdeen, in the County of Meath and in the County of Argyll, is a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. It was created on 4 January 1916 for John Hamilton-Gordon, 7th Earl of Aberdeen.\nFamily history.\nBaronetcy of Haddo.\nThe Gordon family descends from John Gordon, who fought as a Royalist against the Covenanters in the Civil War. In 1642 he was created a baronet, of Haddo in the County of Aberdeen, in the Baronetage of Nova Scotia. In 1644 he was found guilty of treason and beheaded, with the baronetcy forfeited. The title was restored after the Restoration for his son John, the second Baronet.\nEarldom of Aberdeen.\nThe second Baronet died without male issue and was succeeded by his younger brother, the third Baronet. He was a noted advocate and served as Lord President of the Court of Session and as Lord Chancellor of Scotland. On 30 November 1682 he was raised to the Peerage of Scotland as Lord Haddo, Methlick, Tarves and Kellie, Viscount of Formartine and Earl of Aberdeen. He was succeeded by his only surviving son, the second Earl. He sat in the House of Lords as a Scottish representative peer from 1721 to 1727. On his death the titles passed to his eldest son from his second marriage, the third Earl. He was a Scottish Representative Peer from 1747 to 1761 and from 1774 to 1790.\nLord Aberdeen, Prime Minister.\nThe third earl was succeeded by his grandson, the fourth Earl, who was the eldest son of George Gordon, Lord Haddo. On 1 June 1814 he was created Viscount Gordon, of Aberdeen in the County of Aberdeen, in the Peerage of the United Kingdom, which entitled him to an automatic seat in the House of Lords. Lord Aberdeen was a distinguished diplomat and statesman and served as Foreign Secretary from 1828 to 1830 and from 1841 to 1846 and as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1852 to 1855. Aberdeen married firstly Lady Catherine Elizabeth (1784\u20131812), daughter of John Hamilton, 1st Marquess of Abercorn, and assumed by Royal licence the additional surname of Hamilton in 1818.\nWhen Lord Aberdeen died, the titles passed to his eldest son from his second marriage to Harriet Douglas, the fifth Earl. He sat as Liberal Member of Parliament (MP) for Aberdeenshire. His eldest son, the sixth Earl, was a sailor and adventurer. He was accidentally drowned off the coast of America in 1870, without marrying or having children.\nMarquess of Aberdeen and Temair.\nThe sixth earl of Aberdeen was succeeded by his younger brother, the seventh Earl. John Hamilton-Gordon, was a Liberal politician and served as Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland in 1886 and from 1905 to 1915 and as Governor General of Canada from 1893 to 1898. On 4 January 1916 he was created Earl of Haddo, in the County of Aberdeen, and Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, in the County of Aberdeen, in the County of Meath and in the County of Argyll. Both titles are in the Peerage of the United Kingdom.\nHe was succeeded by his eldest son, the second Marquess, who was a member of the London County Council and served as Lord-Lieutenant of Aberdeenshire. He was childless and was succeeded by his younger brother, the third Marquess. He was notably President of the Federation of British Industries. When he died the titles passed to his eldest son, the fourth Marquess. He was a member of the Aberdeenshire County Council and Lord-Lieutenant of Aberdeenshire. He had four adopted children but no biological issue and was succeeded by his younger brother, the fifth Marquess. He was a broadcaster working for the BBC. He never married and on his death in 1984 the titles passed to his fourth and youngest brother, the sixth Marquess. He was Chairman of The Arts Club. Upon his death in 2002, the seventh Marquess, who was a Deputy Lieutenant of Aberdeenshire, inherited the titles. , the Marquessate is held by George Gordon, who is the eighth Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, having succeeded in that year.\nOther family members.\nNumerous other members of the Gordon family have also gained distinction. The Hon. William Gordon (died 1816), eldest son from the third marriage of the second Earl, was a general in the Army. The Hon. Cosmo Gordon, second son from the third marriage of the second Earl, was a colonel in the Army. The Hon. Alexander Gordon (1739\u20131792), third son from the third marriage of the second Earl, was a Lord of Session from 1788 to 1792 under the judicial title of Lord Rockville. His son William Duff-Gordon was Member of Parliament for Worcester. In 1815 he succeeded his uncle as second Baron of Halkin according to a special remainder and assumed the additional surname of Duff (see Duff-Gordon baronets for further history of this branch of the family). The Hon. William Gordon, younger brother of the fourth Earl, was a vice-admiral in the Royal Navy and sat as Member of Parliament for Aberdeenshire. The Hon. Alexander Gordon (1786\u20131815), younger brother of the fourth Earl, was a soldier and was killed at the Battle of Waterloo.\nThe Hon. Sir Robert Gordon, younger brother of the fourth Earl, was a diplomat and served as British Ambassador to Austria. The Hon. John Gordon (1792\u20131869), younger brother of the fourth Earl, was an admiral in the Royal Navy. The Hon. Sir Alexander Hamilton-Gordon (1817\u20131890), eldest son of the second marriage of the fourth Earl, was a general in the Army and sat as Member of Parliament for Aberdeenshire East. His eldest son, Sir Alexander Hamilton-Gordon was also a general in the Army. Reverend the Hon. Douglas Hamilton-Gordon (1824\u20131901), third son of the second marriage of the fourth Earl, was Chaplain-in-Ordinary to Queen Victoria and Canon of Salisbury. The Hon. Arthur Hamilton-Gordon, fourth son of the second marriage of the fourth Earl, was a Liberal politician and was created Baron Stanmore in 1893 (see this title for more information on him and this branch of the family). Ishbel Hamilton-Gordon, Marchioness of Aberdeen and Temair, daughter of Dudley Marjoribanks, 1st Baron Tweedmouth, and wife of the first Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, was an author, philanthropist and an advocate of woman's interests.\nThe family seat is Haddo House, Aberdeenshire. The title Earl of Haddo is the courtesy title for the Marquess's eldest son and heir, the eldest son of whom uses the courtesy title Viscount of Formartine. The Marquesses of Aberdeen and Temair are related to the Marquesses of Huntly. Sir John Gordon (died c. 1395) of Strathbogie, ancestor of Sir John Gordon, 1st Baronet, was the brother of Elizabeth Gordon. She married Sir Alexander Seton (died 1438) and was the mother of Alexander Gordon, 1st Earl of Huntly (ancestor of the Marquesses of Huntly).\nPresent peer.\nGeorge Ian Alastair Gordon, 8th Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (born 4 May 1983) is the son of the 7th Marquess and his wife Joanna Clodagh Houldsworth. Styled formally as Viscount Formartine from 1984, he was educated at Harrow School.\nHe was styled as Earl of Haddo between 2002 and 12 March 2020, when he succeeded his father as Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, Earl of Haddo, Earl of Aberdeen, Viscount of Formartine, Viscount Gordon of Aberdeen, Lord Haddo, Methlick, Tarves and Kellie, and also as a baronet (Gordon, of Haddo, Aberdeenshire, 1642).\nAs Lord Haddo he married Isabelle Coaten, daughter of David Coaten, and they have four children \nSuccession and family tree.\nThere are further heirs to the subsidiary Earldom of Aberdeen, including the Duff-Gordon baronets, who are descended from Lord Rockville, a younger son of the second earl."}
{"id": "10143", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10143", "title": "East Brunswick", "text": ""}
{"id": "10147", "revid": "44572431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10147", "title": "East Coast Swing", "text": "East Coast Swing (ECS) is a form of social partner dance. It belongs to the group of swing dances. It is danced under fast swing music, including: big band, rock and roll, rockabilly, and boogie-woogie.\nYerrington and Outland equated East Coast Swing to the New Yorker in 1961. Originally known as \"Eastern Swing\" by Arthur Murray Studios, the name East Coast Swing became more common between 1975 and 1980.\nHistory.\nThe dance was created by dance studios including the Arthur Murray dance studios in the 1940s, based on the Lindy Hop. Lindy Hop was felt by dance studios to be both too difficult and too unstructured to teach to beginning dancers, but there was market demand for training in swing dance. The dance studios had initially dismissed Lindy Hop in particular as a fad. East Coast Swing can be referred to by many different names in different regions of the United States and the World. It has alternatively been called Eastern Swing, Jitterbug, American Swing, East Coast Lindy, Lindy (not to be confused with Lindy Hop), and Triple Swing (or Triple-step swing). Other variants of East Coast Swing that use altered footwork forms are known as Single Swing or \"Single-step Swing\" (where the triple step is replaced by a single step forming a slow, slow, quick, quick rhythm common to Foxtrot), and Double Swing (using a tap-step footwork pattern).\nEast Coast Swing is a rhythm dance that has both 6 and 8 beat patterns.\nThe name \"East Coast Swing\" was coined initially to distinguish the dance from the street form and the new variant used in the competitive ballroom arena (as well as separating the dance from West Coast Swing, which was developed in California). While based on Lindy Hop, it does have clear distinctions. East Coast Swing is a standardized form of dance developed first for instructional purposes in the Arthur Murray studios, and then later codified to allow for a medium of comparison for competitive ballroom dancers. It can be said that there is no right or wrong way to dance it; however, certain styles of the dance are considered correct \"form\" within the technical elements documented and governed by the National Dance Council of America. The N.D.C.A. oversees all the standards of American Style Ballroom and Latin dances. Lindy Hop was never standardized and later became the inspiration for several other dance forms such as: (European) Boogie Woogie, Jive, West Coast Swing and Rock and Roll.\nIn practice on the social dance floor, the six count steps of the East Coast Swing are sometimes mixed with the eight count steps of Lindy Hop, Charleston, and less frequently, Balboa.\nBasic Positions/Moves.\nThe 5 basic positions/moves are:\nBasic technique.\nSingle-step Swing\nEast Coast Swing has a 6 count basic step. This is in contrast to the meter of most swing music, which has a 4 count basic rhythm. In practice, however, the 6-count moves of the east coast swing are sometimes combined with 8-count moves from the Lindy hop, Charleston, and Balboa.\nDepending on the region and instructor, the basic step of single-step East Coast Swing is either \"rock step, step, step\" or \"step, step, rock step\". In both cases, the rock step always starts on the downbeat.\nFor \"rock step, step, step\" the beats, or counts, are the following:\nSteps for the \"lead\" (traditionally, the man's part)\nSteps for the \"follow\" (traditionally, the woman's part which mirrors the lead's part)\nFor \"step, step, rock step,\" the rock step occurs on beats 5 and 6, but the overall progression remains the same.\nThe normal steps can be substituted with a triple step or double step \"step-tap\" or \"kick-step\" instead of a single step. This is commonly used during songs when a slower tempo makes the single step difficult (an example progression would be \"rock step, triple step, triple step\").\nTiming.\nBecause East Coast uses a six step pattern with music employing 4 beats per measure, three measures of music are required to complete two sets of steps, as shown in the following table.\nThe rock step starts on 1, 2 the first triple step starts 3a4 and the second on 5a6.\nIn single time style (used with faster music) the triple steps are replaced by single steps, so two beats of music are used for each single step while each step in the rock (R) step (S) is still completed in one beat, finishing the cycle in six musical beats. Some instructors will teach vocalizing the single time style as\" \"Quick. Quick. Slow. Slow. \" or \"Back Step. Slow. Slow.\"\nThere is the choice to start with triples or with a rock step, however if you check the above chart where a triple step starts on a 1, 2 you can see that the pattern progresses and wraps back around. The choice of starting with a triple or a rock step does have musical consequences as music has phrasing with hits that often happen on 12, or 24 or 36... This means that dancers who choose to start with a rock step will probably find themselves on a rock step on every new phrase. Those who start with a triple will start with a triple on each new phrase. An advantage of starting with the triple step is that dancers can more easily change their foot work right at the start of the musical phrase."}
{"id": "10148", "revid": "39165258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10148", "title": "Ernst Kaltenbrunner", "text": "Ernst Kaltenbrunner (4 October 1903 \u2013 16 October 1946) was a high-ranking Austrian SS official during the Nazi era and a major perpetrator of the Holocaust. After the assassination of Reinhard Heydrich in 1942, and a brief period under Heinrich Himmler, Kaltenbrunner was the third Chief of the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA), which included the offices of Gestapo, Kripo and SD, from January 1943 until the end of World War II in Europe.\nKaltenbrunner joined the Nazi Party in 1930 and the SS in 1931, and by 1935 he was considered a leader of the Austrian SS. In 1938, he assisted in the \"Anschluss\" and was given command of the SS and police force in Austria. In January 1943, Kaltenbrunner was appointed chief of the RSHA, succeeding Reinhard Heydrich, who was assassinated in May 1942.\nA committed antisemite, Kaltenbrunner played a pivotal role in orchestrating the Holocaust and Nazi genocide intensified under his leadership. He oversaw the coordination of security and law enforcement agencies involved in widespread extermination, the suppression of resistance movements in occupied territories, extensive arrests, deportations, and executions. He was the highest-ranking member of the SS to face trial (Himmler having died of suicide in May 1945) at the Nuremberg trials, where he was found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity. Kaltenbrunner was sentenced to death, and was executed by hanging on 16 October 1946.\nPersonal life.\nKaltenbrunner was born in Ried im Innkreis, Austria, the son of a lawyer, spent his early years and primary education in Raab and later attended the Realgymnasium in Linz. Raised in a nationalist family, he was childhood friends with Adolf Eichmann, the infamous SS officer who played a key role in implementing the Nazis' \"Final Solution\" against Europe's Jews. After Gymnasium, Kaltenbrunner went on to obtain his PhD in law at Graz University in 1926.\nKaltenbrunner worked at a law firm in Salzburg for a year before opening his own law office in Linz. He had deep scars on his face reportedly from duelling in his student days, although some sources attribute them to a car accident.\nOn 14 January 1934, Kaltenbrunner married Elisabeth Eder (20 October 1908 \u2013 20 May 2002), who was also a Nazi Party member; the couple had three children. In addition to the children from his marriage, Kaltenbrunner had twins, Ursula and Wolfgang (b. 1945) with his long-time mistress, Gisela Gr\u00e4fin von Westarp (27 June 1920 \u2013 2 June 1983). All the children survived the war.\nSS career.\nOn 18 October 1930, Kaltenbrunner joined the Nazi Party as member number 300,179. In 1931, he was the \"Bezirksredner\" (district speaker) for the Nazi Party in Upper Austria. Kaltenbrunner joined the SS on 31 August 1931; his SS number was 13,039. He first became a \"Rechtsberater\" (legal consultant) for the Nazi Party in 1929 and later held this same position for SS Abschnitt (Section) VIII, beginning in 1932. That same year he began working at his father's law practice, and by 1933 he had become head of the National-Socialist Lawyers' League in Linz.\nIn January 1934, Kaltenbrunner was briefly jailed at the Kaisersteinbruch detention camp with other Nazis for conspiracy by the Engelbert Dollfuss government. While there he led a hunger strike which forced the government to release 490 of the party members. In 1935, he was jailed again on suspicion of high treason. This charge was dropped, but he was sentenced to six months imprisonment for conspiracy and he lost his license to practice law.\nFrom mid-1935 Kaltenbrunner was head of the illegal SS Abschnitt VIII in Linz and was considered a leader of the Austrian SS. To provide Heinrich Himmler, Reinhard Heydrich and Heinz Jost with new information, Kaltenbrunner repeatedly made trips to Bavaria. He would hide on a train and on a ship that travelled to Passau, then return with money and orders for Austrian comrades. In 1937 Kaltenbrunner was arrested again by Austrian authorities on charges of heading the illegal Nazi Party organization in Ober\u00f6sterreich. He was released in September.\nActing on orders from Hermann G\u00f6ring, Kaltenbrunner assisted in bringing about the \"Anschluss\" with Germany (13 March 1938); he was awarded the role of State Secretary for Public Security in the Seyss-Inquart cabinet of 11 to 13 March 1938. Controlled from behind the scenes by Himmler, Kaltenbrunner still led, albeit clandestinely, the Austrian SS as part of his duty to \"coordinate\" and manage the Austrian population \u2013 this entailed the Nazification of all aspects of Austrian society. Then on 21 March 1938, he was promoted to SS-\"Brigadef\u00fchrer\". He was a member of the German \"Reichstag\" from 10 April 1938 until 8 May 1945. Amid this activity, he helped establish the Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp near Linz. Mauthausen was the first Nazi concentration camp opened in Austria following the \"Anschluss\". On 11 September 1938, Kaltenbrunner was promoted to the rank of SS-\"Gruppenf\u00fchrer\" (equivalent to a lieutenant general in the German Army) while holding the position of F\u00fchrer of SS-Oberabschnitt \u00d6sterreich (re-designated SS-Oberabschnitt Donau in November 1938). Also in 1938, he was appointed Higher SS and Police Leader (\"H\u00f6herer SS- und Polizeif\u00fchrer\"; HSSPF) for \"Oberabschnitt Donau\", which was the primary SS command in Austria (he held that post until 30 January 1943).\nWorld War II.\nIn June 1940, Kaltenbrunner was appointed Vienna's chief of police and held that additional post for a year. In July 1940, he was commissioned as an SS-\"Untersturmf\u00fchrer\" into the Waffen-SS Reserve. Alongside his many official duties, Kaltenbrunner also developed an intelligence network across Austria, moving southeastwards, which eventually brought him to Himmler's attention for appointment as chief of the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA) in January 1943. The RSHA was composed of the SiPo (\"Sicherheitspolizei\"; the combined forces of the Gestapo and Kripo) along with the SD (\"Sicherheitsdienst\", Security Service). Kaltenbrunner replaced Heydrich, who had been assassinated in June 1942. Kaltenbrunner held this position until the end of World War II. Hardly anyone knew Kaltenbrunner, and upon his appointment, Himmler transferred responsibility both for SS personnel and for economics from the RSHA to the SS Main Economic and Administrative Office. Nonetheless, Kaltenbrunner was promoted to SS-\"Obergruppenf\u00fchrer und General der Polizei\" on 21 June 1943. He also replaced Heydrich as president (serving from 1943 to 1945) of the International Criminal Police Commission (ICPC), the organization today known as Interpol.\nFearing a collapsing home-front due to the Allied bombing campaigns, and worried that another \"stab-in-the-back\" at home could arise as a result, Kaltenbrunner immediately tightened the Nazi grip within Germany. From what historian Anthony Read relates, Kaltenbrunner's appointment as RSHA chief came as a surprise given the other possible candidates like the head of the Gestapo, Heinrich M\u00fcller, or even the SD foreign-intelligence chief, Walter Schellenberg. Historian Richard Grunberger also added the name of Wilhelm Stuckart, the future minister of the German Interior, as another potential candidate for head of the RSHA; however, he suggests that Kaltenbrunner was most likely selected since he was a comparative \"newcomer\", expected to be more \"pliable\" in Himmler's hands.\nLike many of the ideological fanatics in the regime, Kaltenbrunner was a committed antisemite. According to former SS-\"Sturmbannf\u00fchrer\" Hans Georg Mayer, Kaltenbrunner was present at a December 1940 meeting among Hitler, Goebbels, Himmler, and Heydrich where it was decided to gas all Jews incapable of heavy physical work. Under Kaltenbrunner's command, the genocide of Jews picked up pace as \"the process of extermination was to be expedited and the concentration of the Jews in the Reich itself and the occupied countries were to be liquidated as soon as possible.\" Kaltenbrunner stayed constantly informed over the status of concentration-camp activities, receiving periodic reports at his office in the RSHA.\nTo combat homosexuality across the greater Reich, Kaltenbrunner pushed the Ministry of Justice in July 1943 for an edict mandating compulsory castration for anyone found guilty of this offence. While this was rejected, he still took steps to get the army to review some 6,000 cases to prosecute homosexuals.\nDuring the summer of 1943, Kaltenbrunner conducted his second inspection of the Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp. While he was there, 15 prisoners were selected to demonstrate for Kaltenbrunner three methods of killing: by a gunshot to the neck, hanging, and gassing. After the killings were performed, Kaltenbrunner inspected the crematorium and later the quarry. In October 1943, he told Herbert Kappler, the head of German police and security services in Rome, that the \"eradication of the Jews in Italy\" was of \"special interest\" for \"general security\". Four days later, Kappler's SS and police units began rounding up and deporting Jews by train to Auschwitz concentration camp.\nIn 1944, during an arranged meeting in Klessheim Castle near Salzburg, when Hitler was in the process of strong-arming Admiral Horthy into a closer integration between Hungary and Nazi Germany, Kaltenbrunner was present for the negotiations and escorted Horthy out once they were over. Accompanying Horthy and Kaltenbrunner on the journey back to Hungary, Adolf Eichmann brought with him a special \"Einsatzkommando\" unit to begin the process of rounding up and deporting Hungary's 750,000 Jews.\nIt was said that even Himmler feared him, as Kaltenbrunner was an intimidating figure with 1.94m (6'4\u00bd\") in height, facial scars, and volatile temper. Kaltenbrunner was also a longtime friend of Otto Skorzeny and recommended him for many secret missions, allowing Skorzeny to become one of Hitler's favourite agents. Kaltenbrunner also allegedly headed Operation Long Jump, an alleged plan to assassinate Stalin, Churchill, and Roosevelt in Tehran in 1943.\nImmediately in the wake of the 20 July Plot on Hitler's life in 1944, Kaltenbrunner was summoned to Hitler's wartime headquarters at the \"Wolfsschanze\" (Wolf's Lair) in East Prussia to begin the investigation into who had planned the assassination attempt. Once it was revealed that an attempted military coup against Hitler had been launched, Himmler and Kaltenbrunner had to tread carefully, as the military was not under the jurisdiction of the Gestapo or the SD. When the attempt failed, the conspirators were soon identified. An estimated 5,000 people were eventually executed, with many more sent to concentration camps.\nHistorian Heinz H\u00f6hne counted Kaltenbrunner among the fanatical Hitler loyalists and described him as being committed \"to the bitter end\". Field reports from the SD in October 1944 about deteriorating morale in the military prompted Kaltenbrunner to urge the involvement of the RSHA in military court-martial proceedings, but this was rejected by Himmler, who thought it unwise to interfere in \"Wehrmacht\" (military) affairs. In December 1944, Kaltenbrunner was granted the additional rank of General of the Waffen-SS. On 15 November 1944, he was awarded the Knights Cross of the War Merit Cross with Swords. In addition, he was awarded the NSDAP Golden Party Badge and the \"Blutorden\" (Blood Order). Using his authority as Chief of the RSHA, Kaltenbrunner issued a decree on 6 February 1945 that allowed policemen to shoot \"disloyal\" people at their discretion, without judicial review.\nOn 12 March 1945, a meeting took place in Vorarlberg between Kaltenbrunner and Carl Jacob Burckhardt, president of the International Committee of the Red Cross (1945\u201348). Just over a month later, Himmler was informed that SS-\"Obergruppenf\u00fchrer\" (general) Karl Wolff had been negotiating with the Allies for the capitulation of Italy. When questioned by Himmler, Wolff explained that he was operating under Hitler's orders and attempting to play separate Allies against one another. Himmler believed him, but Kaltenbrunner did not, and told Himmler that an informant claimed that Wolff had also negotiated with Cardinal Schuster of Milan and was about to surrender occupied Italy to the Allies. Himmler angrily repeated the allegations; Wolff, feigning offence, challenged Himmler to present these statements to Hitler. Unnerved by Wolff's demands, Himmler backed down, and Hitler sent Wolff back to Italy to continue his purported disruption of the Allies.\nOn 18 April 1945, three weeks before the war ended, Himmler named Kaltenbrunner commander-in-chief of the remaining German forces in southern Europe. Kaltenbrunner attempted to organize cells for post-war sabotage in the region and Germany but accomplished little. Hitler made one of his last appearances on 20 April 1945 outside the subterranean in Berlin, where he pinned medals on boys from the Hitler Youth for their bravery. Kaltenbrunner was among those present, but realizing the end was near, he then fled from Berlin.\nArrest.\nOn 12 May 1945 Kaltenbrunner was apprehended along with his adjutant, Arthur Scheidler, and two SS guards in a remote cabin at the top of the Totes Gebirge mountains near Altaussee, Austria, by a search party initiated by the 80th Infantry Division, Third U.S. Army. Information had been gained from Johann Brandauer, the assistant burgermeister of Altaussee, that the party was hiding out with false papers in the cabin. This was supported by an eyewitness sighting by the Altaussee mountain ranger five days earlier. Special Agent Robert E. Matteson from the U.S. Army's Counterintelligence Corps Detachment organized and led a patrol consisting of Brandauer, four ex-\"Wehrmacht\" soldiers, and a squad of U.S. soldiers to effect the arrest. The party climbed over mountainous and glacial terrain for six hours in darkness before arriving at the cabin. After a short standoff, all four men exited the cabin and surrendered without a shot fired. Kaltenbrunner claimed to be a doctor and offered a false name. However, upon their arrival back to town his last mistress, Countess Gisela von Westarp, and the wife (Iris) of his adjutant Arthur Scheidler chanced to spot the men being led away; the ladies called out to both men and embraced them. This action resulted in their identification and arrest by U.S. troops.\nIn 2001, Ernst Kaltenbrunner's personal Nazi security seal was found in an Alpine lake in Styria, Austria, 56 years after he had thrown it away to hide his identity. The seal was recovered by a Dutch citizen on holiday. The seal has the words \"Chef der Sicherheitspolizei und des SD\" (Chief of the Security Police and SD) engraved on it. Experts have examined the seal and believe it was discarded in the final days of the European war in May 1945.\nNuremberg trials.\nAt the Nuremberg trials, Kaltenbrunner was charged with conspiracy to commit crimes against peace, war crimes and crimes against humanity. Due to the areas over which he exercised responsibility as an SS general and as chief of the RSHA, he was acquitted of crimes against peace, but held responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity.\nDuring the initial stages of the Nuremberg trials, Kaltenbrunner was absent because of two episodes of subarachnoid hemorrhage, which required several weeks of recovery time. After his health improved, the tribunal denied his request for pardon. When he was released from a military hospital he pleaded not guilty to the charges of the indictment against him. Kaltenbrunner said all decrees and legal documents that bore his signature were \"rubber-stamped\" and filed by his adjutant(s). He also said Gestapo Chief Heinrich M\u00fcller had illegally affixed his signature to numerous documents in question.\nKaltenbrunner argued in his defence that his position as RSHA chief existed only theoretically and said he was only active in matters of espionage and intelligence. He maintained that Himmler, as his superior, was the person culpable for the atrocities committed during his tenure as chief of the RSHA. Kaltenbrunner also asserted that he had no knowledge of the Final Solution before 1943 and went on to claim that he protested against the ill-treatment of the Jews to Himmler and Hitler. Further denials from Kaltenbrunner included statements that he knew nothing of the Commissar Order and that he never visited Mauthausen concentration camp, despite documentation of his visit. At one point, Kaltenbrunner went so far as to avow that \"he\" was responsible for bringing the Final Solution to an end. In response to his denials, people in the courtroom laughed.\nConviction and execution.\nOn 30 September 1946, the International Military Tribunal (IMT) found Kaltenbrunner not guilty of crimes against peace, but guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity (counts three and four). On 1 October 1946, the IMT sentenced him to death by hanging.\nKaltenbrunner was executed on 16 October 1946, around 1:15\u00a0am, in Nuremberg. His body, like those of the other nine executed men and that of Hermann G\u00f6ring (who committed suicide the previous day), was cremated at the Eastern Cemetery in Munich and the ashes were scattered in a tributary of the River Isar."}
{"id": "10149", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10149", "title": "Englebert Dolfuss", "text": ""}
{"id": "10150", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10150", "title": "Engelbert Dollfuss", "text": "Engelbert Dollfuss (alternatively Dollfu\u00df; 4 October 1892 \u2013 25 July 1934) was an Austrian politician who served as Chancellor and Dictator of Austria between 1932 and 1934. Having served as Minister for Forests and Agriculture, he ascended to Federal Chancellor in 1932 in the midst of a crisis for the conservative government. This crisis culminated in the self-elimination of the Austrian Parliament, a coup sparked by the resignation of the presiding officers of the National Council. Suppressing the Socialist movement in the Austrian Civil War and later banning the Austrian Nazi Party, he cemented the rule of Austrofascism through the \"First of May Constitution\" in 1934. Later that year, Dollfuss was assassinated as part of a failed coup attempt by Nazi agents. His successor Kurt Schuschnigg maintained the regime until Adolf Hitler's Anschluss in 1938.\nEarly life.\nDollfuss was born to a poor, peasant family in the hamlet of Great Maierhof in the commune of St. Gotthard near Texingtal in Lower Austria. Young Dollfuss spent his childhood in his step-father's house in the nearby commune of Kirnberg, where he also went to elementary school. The local parish priests helped to finance Dollfuss's education, as his parents were unable to do so by themselves alone. He attended high school in Hollabrunn. After graduating from high school, Dollfuss intended to become a priest, and thus he enrolled at the University of Vienna to study theology, but after a few months changed course and started studying law in 1912. As a student, he earned a livelihood by giving lessons. He became a member of the Students' Social Movement, a student organisation dedicated to social and charitable work among the workers.\nAs World War I broke out, Dollfuss was reported to be recruited in Vienna but was rejected because he was two centimetres shorter than the minimum. Fully grown, he was less than in height, and later was nicknamed \"Millimetternich\", a portmanteau of \"Millimeter\" (German for millimetre) and Klemens von Metternich. The same day he was rejected in Vienna, Dollfuss went to St. P\u00f6lten where the recruiting commission for his district was located and insisted on being recruited, and, even though he did not meet the minimum height standards, he was accepted. As a volunteer, he had a right to choose a regiment in which he would serve, and Dollfuss opted for the Tyrolese militia also known as the \"Kaisersch\u00fctzen\". He was soon promoted to the rank of corporal. He served for 37 months at the Italian Front, south of Tyrol. By 1916 he was promoted to lieutenant.\nAfter the war, he was still a student and was employed by the Lower Austrian Peasants' Union, which helped him to secure his material existence, and it was here where Dollfuss gained his first political experience. There, he organised peasants to help them recover from the war, as well as shield them from the influences of Marxism. Being recognised for the abilities he showed at the Union, he was sent for further studies to Berlin. In Berlin, he began to garner dislike for some of his professors, as academia there was substantially influenced by liberalism and socialism. In his studies, he devoted himself to the Christian principles of economics. In Germany, he became a member of the Federation of German Peasants' Union and of the Preussenkasse \u2013 essentially, a central bank for member cooperatives, where he gained practical experience. In Germany, he met his future wife Alwine Glienke, a descendant of a Pomeranian family. Dollfuss often met with Carl Sonnenschein, leader of social activities of students and the pioneer of the Catholic movement in Berlin.\nAfter returning to Vienna, he was a secretary of the Lower Austrian Peasants' Union. He devoted his efforts to consolidating that industry. Dollfuss was instrumental in the founding of the regional Chamber of Agriculture of Lower Austria, becoming its secretary and a director; the Federation of Agriculture and the Agricultural Labourers' Insurance Institute; in organising the new Agrarian policy of Lower Austria and in laying the foundations for the corporative organisation of agriculture. A few years later, he was a representative of Austria at the International Agrarian Congress, where his proposals made him internationally known in that sphere. He was seen as an unofficial leader of the Austrian peasantry.\nOn 1 October 1930 Dollfuss was appointed the president of the Federal Railways, the largest industrial corporation in Austria. There, Dollfuss came into contact with all branches of the industry. In March 1931, he was appointed Federal Minister of Agriculture and Forestry.\nChancellor of Austria.\nOn 10 May 1932, Dollfuss, age 39 and with only one year's experience in the Federal Government, was offered the office of Chancellor by President Wilhelm Miklas, also a member of the Christian-Social Party. Dollfuss refused to reply, instead spending the night in his favourite church praying, returning in the morning for a bath and a spartan meal before replying to the President that he would accept the offer. Dollfuss was sworn in on 20 May 1932 as head of a coalition government between the Christian-Social Party, the Landbund \u2013 a right-wing agrarian party \u2013 and Heimatblock, the parliamentary wing of the \"Heimwehr\", a paramilitary ultra-nationalist group. The coalition assumed the pressing task of tackling the problems of the Great Depression. Much of the Austro-Hungarian Empire's industry had been situated in the areas that became part of Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia after World War I as a result of the Treaty of Saint-Germain. Postwar Austria was therefore economically disadvantaged.\nDollfuss's support in Parliament was marginal; his coalition had only a one-vote majority.\nDollfuss as dictator of Austria.\nAscent to power.\nIn March 1933, a constitutional impasse arose over irregularities in the voting procedure in the Austrian parliament. The Social Democratic president of the National Council (the lower house of parliament), Karl Renner, resigned to be able to cast a vote as a parliament member. As a consequence, the two vice presidents, belonging to other parties, resigned as well in order to be able to vote. Without a president, the parliament could not conclude the session. Dollfuss took the three resignations as a pretext to declare that the National Council had become unworkable and advised President Wilhelm Miklas to issue a decree adjourning it indefinitely. \nOn March 7, Dolfuss announced his government had assumed emergency powers based on the \"Wartime Economy Authority Law,\" which had been passed in 1917. From that point onwards, he governed by emergency decree, effectively seizing dictatorial powers. When the National Council wanted to reconvene on 15 March, days after the resignation of the three presidents, Dollfuss had the police bar entrance to the chamber, effectively eliminating democracy in Austria.\nDollfuss was concerned that with German National Socialist leader Adolf Hitler as Chancellor of Germany from January 1933, the Austrian National Socialists (DNSAP) could gain a significant minority in future elections (according to fascism scholar Stanley G. Payne, should elections have been held in 1933, the DNSAP could have mustered about 25% of the votes \u2013 contemporary \"Time\" magazine analysts suggest higher support of 50%, with a 75% approval rate in the Tyrol region bordering Nazi Germany). In addition, the Soviet Union's influence in Europe had increased throughout the 1920s and early 1930s. Dollfuss banned the Communist Party of Austria on 26 May 1933 and the DNSAP on 19 June 1933. Under the banner of the Fatherland Front, he later established a one-party dictatorship rule largely modelled after fascism in Italy, banning all other Austrian parties \u2013 including the Social Democratic Labour Party (SDAP\u00d6). Social Democrats however continued to exist as an independent organization, nevertheless, though without its paramilitary \"Republikanischer Schutzbund\", which until banned on 31 March 1933 could have mustered tens of thousands against Dollfuss's government.\nAustrofascism.\nDollfuss modelled Austrofascism according to Catholic corporatist ideals with anti-secularist tones and in a similar way to Italian fascism, dropping Austrian pretenses of unification with Germany as long as the Nazi Party remained in power there. In August 1933, Benito Mussolini's regime issued a guarantee of Austrian independence. Dollfuss also exchanged \"Secret Letters\" with Mussolini about ways to guarantee Austrian independence. Mussolini had an interest in Austria forming a buffer zone against Nazi Germany. Dollfuss always stressed the similarity of the r\u00e9gimes of Hitler in Germany and Joseph Stalin in the Soviet Union and was convinced that Austrofascism and Italian fascism could counter totalitarian national-socialism and communism in Europe.\nIn September 1933 Dollfuss merged his Christian Social Party with elements of other nationalist and conservative groups, including the Heimwehr (which encompassed many workers who were unhappy with the radical leadership of the socialist party) to form the \"Vaterl\u00e4ndische Front\", though the Heimwehr continued to exist as an independent organization until 1936, when Dollfuss's successor Kurt von Schuschnigg forcibly merged it into the Front, instead creating the unabidingly loyal \"Frontmiliz\" as a paramilitary task-force. Dollfuss was shot and wounded in an assassination attempt in October 1933 by Rudolf Dertill, a 22-year-old who had been ejected from the military for his pro-Nazi views and had joined the Nazi Party in 1932. Dertill was sentenced to five years in prison for attempted murder. In the aftermath of the attempted assassination, Dollfuss declared martial law, which allowed for the resumption of capital punishment in Austria.\nAustrian Civil War.\nIn its drive to eliminate the Social Democrats' \"Schutzbund\", the Dollfuss government searched the homes and meeting places of its members for weapons. On 12 February 1934, the Austrian Civil War was sparked by the armed resistance of the Linz branch of the Social Democrats to the search of their party headquarters. Word of the fighting in Linz spread quickly, and additional armed conflicts broke out, primarily in Austria's industrial regions and Vienna. The \"Schutzbund\" was greatly outnumbered by the police and army, which used artillery against the insurgents. In addition, the general strike which had been called to support the uprising failed to materialize. The result was the collapse of the rebellion by 15 February, with the deaths of about 350 persons, roughly equally divided between civilians, insurgents, and government forces. The Social Democrats were outlawed by the Federal government on 12 February 1934, and their leaders were imprisoned or fled abroad.\nNew constitution.\nDollfuss staged a rump parliamentary session with just Fatherland Front members present in April 1934 to have a new constitution approved, effectively the second constitution in the world espousing corporatist ideas (after that of the Portuguese \"Estado Novo\"). The session retrospectively made all the decrees already passed since March 1933 legal. The new constitution became effective on 1 May 1934 and swept away the last remnants of democracy and the system of the First Austrian Republic, establishing the Federal State of Austria. Based on Italian Fascism, Austria officially became a one-party authoritarian state. Opposing the Anschluss, Dollfuss and the Fatherland Front made heavy use of the Austrians' Catholic religion in an attempt to cultivate a sense of nationalism and prevent it from being absorbed by Nazi Germany.\nAssassination.\nAs a result of his consistent opposition to Nazi demands, Dollfuss was assassinated on 25 July 1934 by a group of Austrian Nazis, including Otto Planetta, Franz Holzweber, Ernst Feike, Franz Leeb, Josef Hackl, Ludwig Maitzen, Erich Wohlraab, and Paul Hudl, who entered the Chancellery building and shot him in an attempted \"coup d'\u00e9tat\". During mass trials which took place after the coup, Hudl was sentenced to life in prison, while the others were sentenced to death for their involvement. Planetta and Holzweber were hanged on 31 July 1934, Feike was hanged on 7 August 1934, and Leeb, Hackl, Maitzen, and Wohlraab were hanged on 13 August 1934. Hudl was released under an amnesty in 1938.\nIn his dying moments, Dollfuss asked for Viaticum, the Eucharist administered to a dying person, but his assassins refused to give it to him. Mussolini had no hesitation in attributing the attack to the German dictator: the news reached him at Cesena, where he was examining the plans for a psychiatric hospital. Mussolini personally gave the announcement to Dollfuss's widow, who was a guest at his villa in Riccione with her children. He also put at the disposal of Ernst R\u00fcdiger Starhemberg, who spent a holiday in Venice, a plane that allowed the prince to rush back to Vienna and to face the assailants with his militia, with the permission of President Wilhelm Miklas.\nMussolini also mobilised a part of the Italian army on the Austrian border and threatened Hitler with war in the event of a German invasion of Austria to thwart the putsch. Then he announced to the world: \"The independence of Austria, for which he has fallen, is a principle that has been defended and will be defended by Italy even more strenuously\", and then replaced in the main square of Bolzano the statue of Walther von der Vogelweide, a Germanic troubadour, with that of Drusus, a Roman general who conquered part of Germany. This was the greatest moment of friction between Italian Fascism and National Socialism and Mussolini himself came down several times to reaffirm the differences in the field.\nThe assassination of Dollfuss was accompanied by uprisings in many regions in Austria, resulting in further deaths. In Carinthia, a large contingent of northern German Nazis tried to seize power but were subdued by the Italian units nearby. At first, Hitler was jubilant, but the Italian reaction surprised him. Hitler became convinced that he could not face a conflict with the Western European powers, and he officially denied liability, stating his regret for the murder of the Austrian Chancellor. He replaced the ambassador to Vienna with Franz von Papen and prevented the conspirators from entering Germany, also expelling them from the Austrian Nazi Party. The Nazi assassins in Vienna, after declaring the formation of a new government under Austrian Nazi Anton Rintelen, previously exiled by Dollfuss as Austrian Ambassador to Rome, surrendered after threats from the Austrian military of blowing up the Chancellery using dynamite, and were subsequently tried and executed by hanging. Kurt Schuschnigg, previously Minister of Education, was appointed new chancellor of Austria after a few days, assuming the office from Dollfuss's deputy Starhemberg.\nOut of a population of 6.5 million, approximately 500,000 Austrians were present at Dollfuss's burial in Vienna. He is interred in the Hietzing cemetery in Vienna. His wife, Alwine Dollfuss (who died in 1973) was later buried beside him. Two of his children, Rudolf and Eva, were in Italy as guests of Rachele Mussolini at the time of his death, an event which saw Mussolini himself shed tears over his slain ally.\nIn literature.\nIn Bertolt Brecht's 1941 play \"The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui\", Dollfuss is represented by the character \"Dullfeet\".&lt;ref name=\"The New York Times - 9 May 1991- Review/Theater; Brecht's Cauliflower King In Another Resistible Rise\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nGordon Brook Shepard wrote a book in 1961 detailing Dolfuss and his rise to power."}
{"id": "10151", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10151", "title": "E. T. A. Hoffmann", "text": "Ernst Theodor Amadeus Hoffmann (born Ernst Theodor Wilhelm Hoffmann; 24 January 1776 \u2013 25 June 1822) was a German Romantic author of fantasy and Gothic horror, a jurist, composer, music critic and artist. He is the author of the novella \"The Nutcracker and the Mouse King\", on which Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's ballet \"The Nutcracker\" is based. In addition, his stories form the basis of Jacques Offenbach's opera \"The Tales of Hoffmann\", in which Hoffmann appears (heavily fictionalized) as the hero. The ballet \"Copp\u00e9lia\" is based on two other stories that Hoffmann wrote, while Schumann's \"Kreisleriana\" is based on Hoffmann's character Johannes Kreisler.\nHoffmann's stories highly influenced 19th-century literature, and he is one of the major authors of the Romantic movement.\nLife.\nYouth.\nHoffmann's ancestors, both maternal and paternal, were jurists. His father, Christoph Ludwig Hoffmann (1736\u201397), was a barrister in K\u00f6nigsberg, Prussia (now Kaliningrad, Russia), as well as a poet and amateur musician who played the viola da gamba. In 1767 he married his cousin, Lovisa Albertina Doerffer (1748\u201396). Ernst Theodor Wilhelm, born on 24 January 1776, was the youngest of three children, of whom the second died in infancy.\nWhen his parents separated in 1778, his father went to Insterburg (now Chernyakhovsk) with his elder son, Johann Ludwig Hoffmann (1768\u20131822), while Hoffmann's mother stayed in K\u00f6nigsberg with her relatives: two aunts, Johanna Sophie Doerffer (1745\u20131803) and Charlotte Wilhelmine Doerffer (c. 1754\u201379) and their brother, Otto Wilhelm Doerffer (1741\u20131811), who were all unmarried. The trio raised the youngster.\nThe household, dominated by the uncle (whom Ernst nicknamed \"O Weh\"\u2014\"Oh dear!\"\u2014in a play on his initials \"O.W.\"), was pietistic and uncongenial. Hoffmann was to regret his estrangement from his father. Nevertheless, he remembered his aunts with great affection, especially the younger, Charlotte, whom he nicknamed \"Tante F\u00fc\u00dfchen\" (\"Aunt Littlefeet\"). Although she died when he was only three years old, he treasured her memory (a character in Hoffmann's \"Lebensansichten des Katers Murr\" is named after her) and embroidered stories about her to such an extent that later biographers sometimes assumed her to be imaginary, until proof of her existence was found after World War II.\nBetween 1781 and 1792 he attended the Lutheran school or \"Burgschule\", where he made good progress in classics. Ernst showed great talent for piano-playing, and busied himself with writing and drawing. The provincial setting was not, however, conducive to technical progress, and despite his many-sided talents he remained rather ignorant of both classical forms and of the new artistic ideas that were developing in Germany. He had, however, read Schiller, Goethe, Swift, Sterne, Rousseau and Jean Paul, and wrote part of a novel titled \"Der Geheimnisvolle\".\nAround 1787 he became friends with Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel the Younger (1775\u20131843), the son of a pastor, and nephew of Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel the Elder, the well-known writer friend of Immanuel Kant. During the year 1792, both attended some of Kant's lectures at the University of K\u00f6nigsberg. Their friendship, although often tested by an increasing social difference, was to be lifelong.\nIn 1794, Hoffmann became enamored of Dora Hatt, a married woman to whom he had given music lessons. She was ten years older, and gave birth to her sixth child in 1795. In February 1796, her family protested against his attentions and, with his hesitant consent, asked another of his uncles to arrange employment for him in Glogau (G\u0142og\u00f3w), Prussian Silesia.\nThe provinces.\nFrom 1796, Hoffmann obtained employment as a clerk for his uncle, Johann Ludwig Doerffer, who lived in Glogau with his daughter Minna. After passing further examinations he visited Dresden, where he was amazed by the paintings in the gallery, particularly those of Correggio and Raphael. During the summer of 1798, his uncle was promoted to a court in Berlin, and the three of them moved there in August\u2014Hoffmann's first residence in a large city. It was there that Hoffmann first attempted to promote himself as a composer, writing an operetta called \"Die Maske\" and sending a copy to Queen Luise of Prussia. The official reply advised to him to write to the director of the Royal Theatre, a man named Iffland. By the time the latter responded, Hoffmann had passed his third round of examinations and had already left for Posen (Pozna\u0144) in South Prussia in the company of his old friend Hippel, with a brief stop in Dresden to show him the gallery.\nFrom June 1800 to 1803, he worked in Prussian provinces in the area of Greater Poland and Masovia. This was the first time he had lived without supervision by members of his family, and he started to become \"what school principals, parsons, uncles, and aunts call dissolute.\"\nHis first job, at Posen, was endangered after Carnival on Shrove Tuesday 1802, when caricatures of military officers were distributed at a ball. It was immediately deduced who had drawn them, and complaints were made to authorities in Berlin, who were reluctant to punish the promising young official. The problem was solved by \"promoting\" Hoffmann to P\u0142ock in New East Prussia, the former capital of Poland (1079\u20131138), where administrative offices were relocated from Thorn (Toru\u0144). He visited the place to arrange lodging, before returning to Posen where he married Mischa (Maria or Marianna Thekla Michalina Rorer, whose Polish surname was Trzci\u0144ska). They moved to P\u0142ock in August 1802.\nHoffmann despaired because of his exile, and drew caricatures of himself drowning in mud alongside ragged villagers. He did make use, however, of his isolation, by writing and composing. He started a diary on 1 October 1803. An essay on the theatre was published in Kotzebue's periodical, \"Die Freim\u00fcthige\", and he entered a competition in the same magazine to write a play. Hoffmann's was called \"Der Preis\" (\"The Prize\"), and was itself about a competition to write a play. There were fourteen entries, but none was judged worthy of the award: 100 Friedrichs d'or. Nevertheless, his entry was singled out for praise. This was one of the few good times of a sad period of his life, which saw the deaths of his uncle J. L. Hoffmann in Berlin, his Aunt Sophie, and Dora Hatt in K\u00f6nigsberg.\nAt the beginning of 1804, he obtained a post at Warsaw. On his way there, he passed through his hometown and met one of Dora Hatt's daughters. He was never to return to K\u00f6nigsberg.\nWarsaw.\nHoffmann assimilated well with Polish society; the years spent in Prussian Poland he recognized as the happiest of his life. In Warsaw he found the same atmosphere he had enjoyed in Berlin, renewing his friendship with Zacharias Werner, and meeting his future biographer, a neighbour and fellow jurist called Julius Eduard Itzig (who changed his name to Hitzig after his baptism). Itzig had been a member of the Berlin literary group called the \"Nordstern,\" or \"North Star\", and he gave Hoffmann the works of Novalis, Ludwig Tieck, Achim von Arnim, Clemens Brentano, Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert, Carlo Gozzi and Calder\u00f3n. These relatively late introductions marked his work profoundly.\nHe moved in the circles of August Wilhelm Schlegel, Adelbert von Chamisso, Friedrich de la Motte Fouqu\u00e9, Rahel Levin and David Ferdinand Koreff.\nBut Hoffmann's fortunate position was not to last: on 28 November 1806, during the War of the Fourth Coalition, Napoleon Bonaparte's troops captured Warsaw, and the Prussian bureaucrats lost their jobs. They divided the contents of the treasury between them and fled. In January 1807, Hoffmann's wife and two-year-old daughter C\u00e4cilia returned to Posen, while he pondered whether to move to Vienna or go back to Berlin. A delay of six months was caused by severe illness. Eventually the French authorities demanded that all former officials swear allegiance or leave the country. As they refused to grant Hoffmann a passport to Vienna, he was forced to return to Berlin.\nHe visited his family in Posen before arriving in Berlin on 18 June 1807, hoping to further his career there as an artist and writer.\nBerlin and Bamberg.\nThe next fifteen months were some of the worst in Hoffmann's life.\nThe city of Berlin was also occupied by Napoleon's troops. Obtaining only meagre allowances, he had frequent recourse to his friends, constantly borrowing money and still going hungry for days at a time; he learned that his daughter had died. Nevertheless, he managed to compose his Six Canticles for \"a cappella\" choir: one of his best compositions, which he would later attribute to Kreisler in \"Lebensansichten des Katers Murr\".\nOn 1 September 1808 he arrived with his wife in Bamberg, where he began a job as theatre manager. The director, Count Soden, left almost immediately for W\u00fcrzburg, leaving a man named Heinrich Cuno in charge. Hoffmann was unable to improve standards of performance, and his efforts caused intrigues against him which resulted in him losing his job to Cuno. He began work as music critic for the \"Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung\", a newspaper in Leipzig, and his articles on Beethoven were especially well received, and highly regarded by the composer himself. It was in its pages that the \"Kapellmeister Johannes Kreisler\" character made his first appearance.\nHoffmann's breakthrough came in 1809, with the publication of \"Ritter Gluck\", a story about a man who meets, or believes he has met, the composer Christoph Willibald Gluck (1714\u201387) more than twenty years after the latter's death. The theme alludes to the work of Jean Paul, who invented the term Doppelg\u00e4nger the previous decade, and continued to exact a powerful influence over Hoffmann, becoming one of his earliest admirers. With this publication, Hoffmann began to use the pseudonym E. T. A. Hoffmann, telling people that the \"A\" stood for \"Amadeus\", in homage to the composer Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1756\u201391). However, he continued to use Wilhelm in official documents throughout his life, and the initials E. T. W. also appear on his gravestone.\nThe next year, he was employed at the Bamberg Theatre as stagehand, decorator, and playwright, while also giving private music lessons.\nHe became so enamored of a young singing student, Julia Marc, that his feelings were obvious whenever they were together, and Julia's mother quickly found her a more suitable match. When Joseph Seconda offered Hoffmann a position as musical director for his opera company (then performing in Dresden), he accepted, leaving on 21 April 1813.\nDresden and Leipzig.\nPrussia had declared war against France on 16 March during the War of the Sixth Coalition, and their journey was fraught with difficulties. They arrived on the 25th, only to find that Seconda was in Leipzig; on the 26th, they sent a letter pleading for temporary funds. That same day Hoffmann was surprised to meet Hippel, whom he had not seen for nine years.\nThe situation deteriorated, and in early May Hoffmann tried in vain to find transport to Leipzig. On 8 May, the bridges were destroyed, and his family were marooned in the city. During the day, Hoffmann would roam, watching the fighting with curiosity. Finally, on 20 May, they left for Leipzig, only to be involved in an accident which killed one of the passengers in their coach and injured his wife.\nThey arrived on 23 May, and Hoffmann started work with Seconda's orchestra, which he found to be of the best quality. On 4 June an armistice began, which allowed the company to return to Dresden. But on 22 August, after the end of the armistice, the family was forced to relocate from their pleasant house in the suburbs into the town, and during the next few days the Battle of Dresden raged. The city was bombarded; many people were killed by bombs directly in front of him. After the main battle was over, he visited the gory battlefield. His account can be found in \"Vision auf dem Schlachtfeld bei Dresden\". After a long period of continued disturbance, the town surrendered on 11 November, and on 9 December the company travelled to Leipzig.\nOn 25 February, Hoffmann quarrelled with Seconda, and the next day he was given notice of twelve weeks. When asked to accompany them on their journey to Dresden in April, he refused, and they left without him. But during July his friend Hippel visited, and soon he found himself being guided back into his old career as a jurist.\nBerlin.\nAt the end of September 1814, in the wake of Napoleon's defeat, Hoffmann returned to Berlin and succeeded in regaining a job at the \"Kammergericht\", the chamber court. His opera \"Undine\" was performed by the Berlin Theatre. Its successful run came to an end only after a fire on the night of the 25th performance. Magazines clamoured for his contributions, and after a while his standards started to decline. Nevertheless, many masterpieces date from this time.\nDuring the period from 1819, Hoffmann was involved with legal disputes, while fighting ill health. Alcohol abuse and syphilis eventually caused weakening of his limbs during 1821, and paralysis from the beginning of 1822. His last works were dictated to his wife or to a secretary.\nPrince Metternich's anti-liberal programs began to put Hoffmann in situations that tested his conscience. Thousands of people were accused of treason for having certain political opinions, and university professors were monitored during their lectures.\nKing Frederick William III of Prussia appointed an Immediate Commission for the investigation of political dissidence; when he found its observance of the rule of law too frustrating, he established a Ministerial Commission to interfere with its processes. The latter was greatly influenced by Commissioner Kamptz. During the trial of \"Turnvater\" Jahn, the founder of the gymnastics association movement, Hoffmann found himself annoying Kamptz, and became a political target. When Hoffmann caricatured Kamptz in a story (\"Meister Floh\"), Kamptz began legal proceedings. These ended when Hoffmann's illness was found to be life-threatening. The King asked for a reprimand only, but no action was ever taken. Eventually \"Meister Floh\" was published with the offending passages removed.\nDeath.\nHoffmann died of syphilis in Berlin on 25 June 1822 at the age of 46. His grave is preserved in the Protestant \"Friedhof III der Jerusalems- und Neuen Kirchengemeinde\" (Cemetery No. III of the congregations of Jerusalem Church and New Church) in Berlin-Kreuzberg, south of Hallesches Tor at the underground station Mehringdamm.\nAssessment.\nHoffmann is one of the best-known representatives of German Romanticism, and a pioneer of the fantasy genre, with a taste for the macabre combined with realism that influenced such authors as Edgar Allan Poe (1809\u20131849), Nikolai Gogol (1809\u20131852), Charles Dickens (1812\u20131870), Charles Baudelaire (1821\u20131867), George MacDonald (1824\u20131905), Fyodor Dostoevsky (1821\u20131881), Vernon Lee (1856\u20131935), Franz Kafka (1883\u20131924) and Alfred Hitchcock (1899\u20131980). Hoffmann's story \"Das Fr\u00e4ulein von Scuderi\" is sometimes cited as the first detective story and a direct influence on Poe's \"The Murders in the Rue Morgue\"; Characters from it also appear in the opera \"Cardillac\" by Paul Hindemith.\nThe twentieth-century Russian literary theorist Mikhail Bakhtin characterised Hoffmann's works as Menippean Satire, essentially satirical and self-parodying in form, thus including him in a tradition that includes Cervantes, Diderot and Voltaire.\nRobert Schumann's piano suite Kreisleriana (1838) takes its title from one of Hoffmann's books (and according to Charles Rosen's \"The Romantic Generation\", is possibly rather inspired by \"The Life and Opinions of Tomcat Murr\", in which Kreisler appears). Jacques Offenbach's masterwork, the opera \"Les contes d'Hoffmann\" (\"The Tales of Hoffmann\", 1881), is based on the stories, principally \"Der Sandmann\" (\"The Sandman\", 1816), \"Rat Krespel\" (\"Councillor Krespel\", 1818), and \"Das verlorene Spiegelbild\" (\"The Lost Reflection\") from \"Die Abenteuer der Silvester-Nacht\" (\"The Adventures of New Year's Eve\", 1814). \"Klein Zaches genannt Zinnober\" (\"Little Zaches called Cinnabar\", 1819) inspired an aria as well as the operetta \"Le Roi Carotte\" (1872). Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's ballet \"The Nutcracker\" (1892) is based on \"The Nutcracker and the Mouse King\", and the ballet \"Copp\u00e9lia\", with music by Delibes, is based on two eerie Hoffmann stories.\nHoffmann also influenced 19th-century musical opinion directly through his music criticism. His reviews of Beethoven's Symphony No. 5 in C minor, Op. 67 (1808) and other important works set new literary standards for writing about music, and encouraged later writers to consider music as \"the most Romantic of all the arts.\" Hoffmann's reviews were first collected for modern readers by Friedrich Schnapp, ed., in \"E.T.A. Hoffmann: Schriften zur Musik; Nachlese\" (1963) and have been made available in an English translation in \"E.T.A. Hoffmann's Writings on Music, Collected in a Single Volume\" (2004).\nHoffmann strove for artistic polymathy. He created far more in his works than mere political commentary achieved through satire. His masterpiece novel \"Lebensansichten des Katers Murr\" (\"The Life and Opinions of Tomcat Murr\", 1819\u20131821) deals with such issues as the aesthetic status of true artistry and the modes of self-transcendence that accompany any genuine endeavour to create. Hoffmann's portrayal of the character Kreisler (a genius musician) is wittily counterpointed with the character of the tomcat Murr \u2013 a virtuoso illustration of artistic pretentiousness that many of Hoffmann's contemporaries found offensive and subversive of Romantic ideals.\nHoffmann's literature indicates the failings of many artists to differentiate between the superficial and the authentic aspects of such Romantic ideals. The \"self-conscious\" effort to impress must, according to Hoffmann, be divorced from the \"self-aware\" effort to create. This essential duality in \"Kater Murr\" is conveyed structurally through a discursive \"splicing together\" of two biographical narratives.\nScience fiction.\nWhile disagreeing with E. F. Bleiler's claim that Hoffmann was \"one of the two or three greatest writers of fantasy\", Algis Budrys of \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" said that he \"did lay down the groundwork for some of our most enduring themes\".\nHistorian Martin Willis argues that Hoffmann's impact on science fiction has been overlooked, saying \"his work reveals a writer dynamically involved in the important scientific debates of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.\" Willis points out that Hoffmann's work is contemporary with \"Frankenstein\" (1818) and with \"the heated debates and the relationship between the new empirical science and the older forms of natural philosophy that held sway throughout the eighteenth century.\" His \"interest in the machine culture of his time is well represented in his short stories, of which the critically renowned \"The Sandman\" (1816) and \"Automata\" (1814) are the best examples. ...Hoffmann's work makes a considerable contribution to our understanding of the emergence of scientific knowledge in the early years of the nineteenth century and to the conflict between science and magic, centred mainly on the 'truths' available to the advocates of either practice. ...Hoffmann's balancing of mesmerism, mechanics, and magic reflects the difficulty in categorizing scientific knowledge in the early nineteenth century.\""}
{"id": "10152", "revid": "8594615", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10152", "title": "Erasmus", "text": "Desiderius Erasmus Roterodamus ( ; ; 28 October c. 1466 \u2013 12 July 1536), commonly known in English as Erasmus of Rotterdam or simply Erasmus, was a Dutch Christian humanist, Catholic priest and theologian, educationalist, satirist, and philosopher. Through his vast number of translations, books, essays, prayers and letters, he is considered one of the most influential thinkers of the Northern Renaissance and one of the major figures of Dutch and Western culture.\nErasmus was an important figure in classical scholarship who wrote in a spontaneous, copious and natural Latin style. As a Catholic priest developing humanist techniques for working on texts, he prepared pioneering new Latin and Greek scholarly editions of the New Testament and of the Church Fathers, with annotations and commentary that were immediately and vitally influential in both the Protestant Reformation and the Catholic Reformation. He also wrote \"On Free Will\", \"The Praise of Folly\", \"The Complaint of Peace\", \"Handbook of a Christian Knight\", \"On Civility in Children\", \"\" and many other popular and pedagogical works.\nErasmus lived against the backdrop of the growing European religious reformations. He developed a biblical humanistic theology in which he advocated the religious and civil necessity both of peaceable concord and of pastoral tolerance on \"matters of indifference\". He remained a member of the Catholic Church all his life, remaining committed to reforming the church from within. He promoted what he understood as the traditional doctrine of synergism, which some prominent reformers such as Martin Luther and John Calvin rejected in favor of the doctrine of monergism. His influential middle-road approach disappointed, and even angered, partisans in both camps.\nLife and career.\nErasmus's almost 70 years may be divided into quarters.\nEarly life.\nDesiderius Erasmus is reported to have been born in Rotterdam on 27 or 28 October (\"the vigil of Simon and Jude\") in the late 1460s. \nHe was named after Erasmus of Formiae, whom Erasmus' father Gerard (Gerardus Helye) personally favored. Although associated closely with Rotterdam, he lived there for only four years, never to return afterwards.\nThe year of Erasmus' birth is unclear: in later life he calculated his age as if born in 1466, but frequently his remembered age at major events actually implies 1469. (This article currently gives 1466 as the birth year. To handle this disagreement, ages are given first based on 1469, then in parentheses based on 1466: e.g., \"20 (or 23)\".) Furthermore, many details of his early life must be gleaned from a fictionalized third-person account he wrote in 1516 (published in 1529) in a letter to a fictitious Papal secretary, Lambertus Grunnius (\"Mr. Grunt\").\nHis parents could not be legally married: his father, Gerard, was a Catholic priest who may have spent up to six years in the 1450s or 60s in Italy as a scribe and scholar. His mother was Margaretha Rogerius (Latinized form of Dutch surname Rutgers), the daughter of a doctor from Zevenbergen. She may have been Gerard's housekeeper. \nAlthough he was born out of wedlock, Erasmus was cared for by his parents, with a loving household and the best education, until their early deaths from the bubonic plague in 1483. His only sibling Peter might have been born in 1463, and some writers suggest Margaret was a widow and Peter was the half-brother of Erasmus; Erasmus on the other hand called him his brother. There were legal and social restrictions on the careers and opportunities open to the children of unwed parents.\nErasmus' own story, in the possibly forged 1524 \"\" was along the lines that his parents were engaged, with the formal marriage blocked by his relatives (presumably a young widow or unmarried mother with a child was not an advantageous match); his father went to Italy to study Latin and Greek, and the relatives misled Gerard that Margaretha had died, on which news grieving Gerard romantically took Holy Orders, only to find on his return that Margaretha was alive; many scholars dispute this account.\nIn 1471 his father became the vice-curate of the small town of Woerden (where young Erasmus may have attended the local vernacular school to learn to read and write) and in 1476 was promoted to vice-curate of Gouda.\nErasmus was given the highest education available to a young man of his day, in a series of monastic or semi-monastic schools. In 1476, at the age of 6 (or 9), his family moved to Gouda and he started at the school of Pieter Winckel, who later became his guardian (and, perhaps, squandered Erasmus and Peter's inheritance.) Historians who date his birth in 1466 have Erasmus in Utrecht at the choir school at this period.\nIn 1478, at the age of 9 (or 12), he and his older brother Peter were sent to one of the best Latin schools in the Netherlands, located at Deventer and owned by the chapter clergy of the Lebu\u00efnuskerk (St. Lebuin's Church). A notable previous student was Thomas \u00e0 Kempis. Towards the end of his stay there the curriculum was renewed by the new principal of the school, Alexander Hegius, a correspondent of pioneering rhetorician Rudolphus Agricola. For the first time in Europe north of the Alps, Greek was taught at a lower level than a university and this is where he began learning it. His education there ended when plague struck the city about 1483, and his mother, who had moved to provide a home for her sons, died from the infection; then his father. Following the death of his parents, as well as 20 fellow students at his school, he moved back to his \"\" (Rotterdam?) where he was supported by Berthe de Heyden, a compassionate widow. \nIn 1484, around the age 14 (or 17), he and his brother went to a cheaper grammar school or seminary at 's-Hertogenbosch run by the Brethren of the Common Life: Erasmus' \"Epistle to Grunnius\" satirizes them as the \"Collationary Brethren\" who select and sort boys for monkhood. He was exposed there to the Devotio moderna movement and the Brethren's famous book \"The Imitation of Christ\" but resented the harsh rules and strict methods of the religious brothers and educators. The two brothers made an agreement that they would resist the clergy but attend the university; Erasmus longed to study in Italy, the birthplace of Latin, and have a degree from an Italian university. Instead, Peter left for the Augustinian canonry in Stein, which left Erasmus feeling betrayed. Around this time he wrote forlornly to his friend Elizabeth de Heyden \"Shipwrecked am I, and lost, 'mid waters chill'.\" He suffered Quartan fever for over a year. Eventually Erasmus moved to the same abbey as a postulant in or before 1487, around the age of 16 (or 19.)\nVows, ordination and canonry experience.\nPoverty had forced the sickly, bookish, teenaged orphan Erasmus into the consecrated life, entering the novitiate in 1487 at the canonry at rural Stein, very near Gouda, South Holland: the \"Chapter of Sion\" community largely borrowed its rule from the larger monkish Congregation of Windesheim who had historical associations with the Brethren of the Common Life, but also with the notable pastoral, mystical and anti-speculative post-scholastic theologians Jean Gerson and Gabriel Biel: positions associated also with Erasmus. In 1488\u20131490, the surrounding region was plundered badly by armies fighting the Squire Francis War of succession and then suffered a famine. Erasmus professed his vows as a Canon regular of St. Augustine there in late 1488 at age 19 (or 22). Historian Fr. Aiden Gasquet later wrote: \"One thing, however, would seem to be quite clear; he could never have had any vocation for the religious life. His whole subsequent history shows this unmistakably.\" But according to one Catholic biographer, Erasmus had a spiritual awakening at the monastery.\nCertain abuses in religious orders were among the chief objects of his later calls to reform the Western Church from within, particularly coerced or tricked recruitment of immature boys (the fictionalized account in the \"Letter to Grunnius\" calls them \"victims of Dominic and Francis and Benedict\"): Erasmus felt he had belonged to this class, joining \"voluntarily but not freely\" and so considered himself, if not morally bound by his vows, certainly legally, socially and honour- bound to keep them, yet to look for his true vocation.\nWhile at Stein, 18-(or 21-)year-old Erasmus fell in unrequited love, forming what he called a \"passionate attachment\" (), with a fellow canon, Servatius Rogerus, and wrote a series of love letters in which he called Rogerus \"half my soul\", writing that \"it was not for the sake of reward or out of a desire for any favour that I have wooed you both unhappily and relentlessly. What is it then? Why, that you love him who loves you.\" This correspondence contrasts with the generally detached and much more restrained attitude he usually showed in his later life, though he had a capacity to form and maintain deep male friendships, such as with More, Colet, and Ammonio. No mentions or sexual accusations were ever made of Erasmus during his lifetime. His works notably praise moderate sexual desire in marriage between men and women.\nIn 1493, his prior arranged for him to leave the Stein house and take up the post of Latin Secretary to the ambitious Bishop of Cambrai, Henry of Bergen, on account of his great skill in Latin and his reputation as a man of letters.\nHe was ordained to the Catholic priesthood either on 25 April 1492, or 25 April 1495, at age 25 (or 28.) Either way, he did not actively work as a choir priest for very long, though his many works on confession and penance suggests experience of dispensing them.\nFrom 1500, he avoided returning to the canonry at Stein even insisting the diet and hours would kill him, though he did stay with other Augustinian communities and at monasteries of other orders in his travels. Rogerus, who became prior at Stein in 1504, and Erasmus corresponded over the years, with Rogerus demanding Erasmus return after his studies were complete. Nevertheless, the library of the canonry ended up with by far the largest collection of Erasmus' publications in the Gouda region.\nIn 1505, Pope Julius II granted a dispensation from the vow of poverty to the extent of allowing Erasmus to hold certain benefices, and from the control and habit of his order, though he remained a priest and, formally, an Augustinian canon regular the rest his life. In 1517, Pope Leo X granted legal dispensations for Erasmus' \"defects of natality\" and confirmed the previous dispensation, allowing the 48-(or 51-)year-old his independence but still, as a canon, capable of holding office as a prior or abbot. In 1525, Pope Clement VII granted, for health reasons, a dispensation to eat meat and dairy in Lent and on fast days.\nTravels.\nErasmus traveled widely and regularly, for reasons of poverty, \"escape\" from his Stein canonry (to Cambrai), education (to Paris, Turin), escape from the sweating sickness plague (to Orl\u00e9ans), employment (to England), searching libraries for manuscripts, writing (Brabant), royal counsel (Cologne), patronage, tutoring and chaperoning (North Italy), networking (Rome), seeing books through printing in person (Paris, Venice, Louvain, Basel), and avoiding the persecution of religious fanatics (to Freiburg). He enjoyed horseback riding.\nParis.\nIn 1495 with Bishop Henry's consent and a stipend, Erasmus went on to study at the University of Paris in the Coll\u00e8ge de Montaigu, a centre of reforming zeal, under the direction of the ascetic Jan Standonck, of whose rigors he complained. The university was then the chief seat of Scholastic learning but already coming under the influence of Renaissance humanism. For instance, Erasmus became an intimate friend of an Italian humanist Publio Fausto Andrelini, poet and \"professor of humanity\" in Paris.\nDuring this time, Erasmus developed a deep aversion to exclusive or excessive Aristotelianism and Scholasticism and started finding work as a tutor/chaperone to visiting English and Scottish aristocrats. There is no record of him graduating.\nFirst visit to England (1499\u20131500).\nErasmus stayed in England at least three times. In between he had periods studying in Paris, Orl\u00e9ans, Leuven and other cities.\nIn 1499 he was invited to England by William Blount, 4th Baron Mountjoy, who offered to accompany him on his trip to England. His time in England was fruitful in the making of lifelong friendships with the leaders of English thought in the days of King Henry VIII.\nDuring his first visit to England in 1499, he studied or taught at the University of Oxford. There is no record of him gaining any degree. Erasmus was particularly impressed by the Bible teaching of John Colet, who pursued a style more akin to the church fathers than the Scholastics. Through the influence of the humanist John Colet, his interests turned towards theology. Other distinctive features of Colet's thought that may have influenced Erasmus are his pacifism, reform-mindedness, anti-Scholasticism and pastoral esteem for the sacrament of Confession.\nThis prompted him, upon his return from England to Paris, to intensively study the Greek language, which would enable him to study theology on a more profound level.\nErasmus also became fast friends with Thomas More, a young law student considering becoming a monk, whose thought (e.g., on conscience and equity) had been influenced by 14th century French theologian Jean Gerson, and whose intellect had been developed by his powerful patron Cardinal John Morton (d. 1500) who had famously attempted reforms of English monasteries.\nErasmus left London with a full purse from his generous friends, to allow him to complete his studies. However, he had been provided with bad legal advice by his friends: the English Customs officials confiscated all the gold and silver, leaving him with nothing except a night fever that lasted several months.\nFrance and Brabant.\nFollowing his first trip to England, Erasmus returned first to poverty in Paris, where he started to compile the \"Adagio\" for his students, then to Orl\u00e9ans to escape the plague, and then to semi-monastic life, scholarly studies and writing in France, notably at the Benedictine Abbey of Saint Bertin at St Omer (1501,1502) where he wrote the initial version of the \"Enchiridion\" (Handbook of the Christian Knight.) A particular influence was his encounter in 1501 with Jean (Jehan) Vitrier, a radical Franciscan who consolidated Erasmus' thoughts against excessive valorization of monasticism, ceremonialism and fasting in a kind of conversion experience, and introduced him to Origen.\nIn 1502, Erasmus went to Brabant, ultimately to the university at Louvain. In 1504 he was hired by the leaders of the Brabantian \"Provincial States\" to deliver one of his few public speeches, a very long formal panegyric for the Philip \"the Fair\", Duke of Burgundy and later King of Castille: the first half being the conventional extravagant praise, but the second half being a strong treatment of the miseries of war, the need for neutrality and conciliation (with the neighbours France and England), and the excellence of peaceful rulers: that real courage in a leader was not to wage war but to put a bridle on greed, etc. This was later published as \"Panegyricus\". Erasmus then returned to Paris in 1504.\nSecond visit to England (1505\u20131506).\nFor Erasmus' second visit, he spent over a year staying at recently married Thomas More's house, now a lawyer and Member of Parliament, honing his translation skills.\nErasmus preferred to live the life of an independent scholar and made a conscious effort to avoid any actions or formal ties that might inhibit his individual freedom. In England Erasmus was approached with prominent offices but he declined them all, until the King himself offered his support. He was inclined, but eventually did not accept and longed for a stay in Italy.\nItaly.\nIn 1506 he was able to accompany and tutor the sons of the personal physician of the English King through Italy to Bologna.\nHis discovery \"en route\" of Lorenzo Valla's \"New Testament Notes\" was a major event in his career and prompted Erasmus to study the New Testament using philology.\nIn 1506 they passed through Turin and he arranged to be awarded the degree of Doctor of Sacred Theology (\"Sacra Theologia\") from the University of Turin at age 37 (or 40.) Erasmus stayed tutoring in Bologna for a year; in the winter, Erasmus was present when Pope Julius II entered victorious into the conquered Bologna which he had besieged before.\nErasmus travelled on to Venice, working on an expanded version of his Adagia at the Aldine Press of the famous printer Aldus Manutius, advised him which manuscripts to publish, and was an honorary member of the graecophone Aldine \"New Academy\" (). From Aldus he learned the in-person workflow that made him productive at Froben: making last-minute changes, and immediately checking and correcting printed page proofs as soon as the ink had dried. Aldus wrote that Erasmus could do twice as much work in a given time as any other man he had ever met.\nIn 1507, according to his letters, he studied advanced Greek in Padua with the Venetian natural philosopher, Giulio Camillo. He found employment tutoring and escorting Scottish nobleman Alexander Stewart, the 24-year old Archbishop of St Andrews, through Padua, Florence, and Siena Erasmus made it to Rome in 1509, visiting some notable libraries and cardinals, but having a less active association with Italian scholars than might have been expected.\nIn 1509, William Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Mountjoy lured him back to England, now ruled by what was hoped would be a wise and benevolent king (Henry VIII) educated by humanists. Warham and Mountjoy sent Erasmus \u00a310 to cover his expenses on the journey. On his trip over the Alps via Spl\u00fcgen Pass, and down the Rhine toward England, Erasmus began to compose \"The Praise of Folly\".\nThird visit to England (1510\u20131515).\nIn 1510, Erasmus arrived at More's bustling house, was confined to bed to recover from his recurrent illness, and wrote \"The Praise of Folly\", which was to be a best-seller. More was at that time the undersheriff of the City of London.\nAfter his glorious reception in Italy, Erasmus had returned broke and jobless, with strained relations with former friends and benefactors on the continent, and he regretted leaving Italy, despite being horrified by papal warfare. There is a gap in his usually voluminous correspondence: his so-called \"two lost years\", perhaps due to self-censorship of dangerous or disgruntled opinions; he shared lodgings with his friend Andrea Ammonio (Latin secretary to Mountjoy, and the next year, to Henry VIII) provided at the London Austin Friars' compound, skipping out after a disagreement with the friars over rent that caused bad blood.\nHe assisted his friend John Colet by authoring Greek textbooks and securing members of staff for the newly established St Paul's School and was in contact when Colet gave his notorious 1512 Convocation sermon which called for a reformation of ecclesiastical affairs. At Colet's instigation, Erasmus started work on \"De copia\".\nIn 1511, the University of Cambridge's chancellor, John Fisher, arranged for Erasmus to be (or to study to prepare to be) the Lady Margaret's Professor of Divinity, though whether he actually was accepted for it or took it up is contested by historians. He studied and taught Greek and researched and lectured on Jerome.\nErasmus mainly stayed at Queens' College while lecturing at the university, between 1511 and 1515. Erasmus' rooms were located in the \"\" staircase of Old Court. Despite a chronic shortage of money, he succeeded in mastering Greek by an intensive, day-and-night study of three years, taught by Thomas Linacre, continuously begging in letters that his friends send him books and money for teachers.\nErasmus suffered from poor health and was especially concerned with heating, clean air, ventilation, draughts, fresh food and unspoiled wine: he complained about the draughtiness of English buildings. He complained that Queens' College could not supply him with enough decent wine (wine was the Renaissance medicine for gallstones, from which Erasmus suffered). As Queens' was an unusually humanist-leaning institution in the 16th century, Queens' College Old Library still houses many first editions of Erasmus's publications, many of which were acquired during that period by bequest or purchase, including Erasmus's New Testament translation, which is signed by friend and Polish religious reformer Jan \u0141aski.\nBy this time More was a judge on the poorman's equity court (Master of Requests) and a Privy Counsellor.\nFlanders and Brabant.\nHis residence at Leuven, where he lectured at the University, exposed Erasmus to much criticism from those ascetics, academics and clerics hostile to the principles of literary and religious reform to which he was devoting his life. In 1514, \"en route\" to Basel, he made the acquaintance of Hermannus Buschius, Ulrich von Hutten and Johann Reuchlin who introduced him to the Hebrew language in Mainz. In 1514, he suffered a fall from his horse and injured his back.\nErasmus may have made several other short visits to England or English territory while living in Brabant. Happily for Erasmus, More and Tunstall were posted in Brussels or Antwerp on government missions around 1516, More for six months, Tunstall for longer. Their circle include Pieter Gillis of Antwerp, in whose house Thomas More's wrote Utopia (pub. 1516) with Erasmus' encouragement, Erasmus editing and perhaps even contributing fragments. His old Cambridge friend Richard Sampson was vicar general running the nearby diocese of Tournai.\nIn 1516, Erasmus accepted an honorary position as a Councillor to Charles V with an annuity of 200 guilders (over US$100,000), rarely paid, and tutored Charles' brother, the teenage future Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand of Hapsburg.\nIn 1516, Erasmus published the first edition of his scholarly Latin-Greek New Testament with annotations, his complete works of Jerome, and \"The Education of a Christian Prince\" (\"Institutio principis Christiani\") for Charles and Ferdinand.\nIn 1517, he supported the foundation at the university of the Collegium Trilingue for the study of Hebrew, Latin, and Greek\u2014after the model of Cisneros' College of the Three Languages at the University of Alcal\u00e1\u2014financed by his late friend Hieronymus van Busleyden's will. On being asked by Jean Le Sauvage, former Chancellor of Brabant and now Chancellor of Burgundy, Erasmus wrote \"The Complaint of Peace\". \nIn 1517, his great friend Ammonio died in England of the Sweating Sickness. In 1518, Erasmus was diagnosed with the plague; despite the danger, he was taken in and cared for in the home of his Flemish friend and publisher Dirk Martens in Antwerp for a month and recovered.\nBy 1518, he reported to Paulus Bombasius that his income was over 300 ducats per year (over US$150,000) without including patronage. By 1522 he reported his annual income as 400 gold florins (over US$200,000.)\nIn 1520 he was present at the Field of the Cloth of Gold with Guillaume Bud\u00e9, probably his last meetings with Thomas More and William Warham. His friends and former students and old correspondents were the incoming political elite, and he had risen with them.\nHe stayed in various locations including Anderlecht (near Brussels) in the summer of 1521.\nBasel (1521\u20131529).\nFrom 1514, Erasmus regularly traveled to Basel to coordinate the printing of his books with Froben. He developed a lasting association with the great Basel publisher Johann Froben and later his son Hieronymus Froben (Eramus' godson) who together published over 200 works with Erasmus, working with expert scholar-correctors who went on to illustrious careers.\nHis initial interest in Froben's operation was aroused by his discovery of the printer's folio edition of the \"Adagiorum Chiliades tres\" (Adagia) (1513). Froben's work was notable for using the new Roman type (rather than blackletter) and Aldine-like Italic and Greek fonts, as well as elegant layouts using borders and fancy capitals; Hans Holbein (the Younger) cut several woodblock capitals for Erasmus' editions. The printing of many his books was supervised by his Alsatian friend, the Greek scholar Beatus Rhenanus.\nIn 1521 he settled in Basel. He was weary of the controversies and hostility at Louvain, and feared being dragged further into the Lutheran controversy. He agreed to be the Froben press' literary superintendent writing dedications and prefaces for an annuity and profit share. Apart from Froben's production team, he had his own householdwith a formidable housekeeper, stable of horses, and up to eight boarders or paid servants: who acted as assistants, correctors, amanuenses, dining companions, international couriers, and carers. It was his habit to sit at times by a ground-floor window, to make it easier to see and be seen by strolling humanists for chatting.\nIn collaboration with Froben and his team, the scope and ambition of Erasmus' \"Annotations\", Erasmus' long-researched project of philological notes of the New Testament along the lines of Valla's \"Adnotations\", had grown to also include a lightly revised Latin Vulgate, then the Greek text, then several edifying essays on methodology, then a highly revised Vulgate\u2014all bundled as his \"Novum testamentum omne\" and pirated individually throughout Europe\u2014 then finally his amplified \"Paraphrases\".\nIn 1522, Erasmus' compatriot, former teacher (c. 1502) and friend from University of Louvain unexpectedly became Pope Adrian VI, after having served as Regent (and/or Grand Inquisitor) of Spain for six years. Like Erasmus and Luther, he had been influenced by the Brethren of the Common Life. He tried to entice Erasmus to Rome. His reforms of the Roman Curia which he hoped would meet the objections of many Lutherans were stymied (party because the Holy See was broke), though re-worked at the Council of Trent, and he died in 1523.\nAs the popular and nationalist responses to Luther gathered momentum, the social disorders, which Erasmus dreaded and Luther disassociated himself from, began to appear, including the German Peasants' War (1524\u20131525), the Anabaptist insurrections in Germany and in the Low Countries, iconoclasm, and the radicalisation of peasants across Europe. If these were the outcomes of reform, Erasmus was thankful that he had kept out of it. Yet he was ever more bitterly accused of having started the whole \"tragedy\" (as Erasmus dubbed the matter).\nIn 1523, he provided financial support to the impoverished and disgraced former Latin Secretary of Antwerp Cornelius Grapheus, on his release from the newly introduced Inquisition. In 1525, a former student of Erasmus who had served at Erasmus' father's former church at Woerden, Jan de Bakker (Pistorius) was the first priest to be executed as a heretic in the Netherlands. In 1529, his French translator and friend Louis de Berquin was burnt in Paris, following his condemnation as an anti-Rome heretic by the Sorbonne theologians.\nFreiburg (1529\u20131535).\nFollowing sudden, violent, iconoclastic rioting in early 1529 led by \u0152colampadius his former assistant, in which elected Catholic councilmen were deposed, the city of Basel definitely adopted the Reformation\u2014finally banning the Catholic Mass on April 1, 1529. \nErasmus, in company with other Basel Catholic priests including Bishop , left Basel on the 13 April 1529 and departed by ship to the Catholic university town of Freiburg im Breisgau to be under the protection of his former student, Archduke Ferdinand of Austria. Erasmus wrote somewhat dramatically to Thomas More of his frail condition at the time: \"I preferred to risk my life rather than appear to approve a programme like theirs. There was some hope of a return to moderation.\" \nIn Spring early 1530 Erasmus was bedridden for three months with an intensely painful infection, likely \"carbunculosis\", that, unusually for him, left him too ill to work. He declined to attend the Diet of Augsburg to which both the Bishop of Augsburg and the Papal legate Campeggio had invited him, and he expressed doubt on non-theological grounds, to Campeggio and Melanchthon, that reconciliation was then possible: he wrote to Campeggio \"I can discern no way out of this enormous tragedy unless God suddenly appears like a \"deus ex machina\" and changes the hearts of men\" and later \"What upsets me is not so much their teaching, especially Luther's, as the fact that, under the pre-text of the gospel, I see a class of men emerging whom I find repugnant from every point of view.\"\nHe stayed for two years on the top floor of the Whale House, then following another rent dispute bought and refurbished a house of his own, where he took in scholar/assistants as table-boarders such as Cornelius Grapheus' friend Dami\u00e3o de G\u00f3is, some of them fleeing persecution.\nDespite increasing frailty Erasmus continued to work productively, notably on a new \"magnum opus\", his manual on preaching \"Ecclesiastes\", and his small book on preparing for death. His boarder for five months, the Portuguese scholar/diplomat Dami\u00e3o de G\u00f3is, worked on his lobbying on the plight of the S\u00e1mi in Sweden and the Ethiopian church, and stimulated Erasmus' increasing awareness of foreign missions.\nThere are no extant letters between More and Erasmus from the start of More's period as Chancellor until his resignation (1529\u20131533), almost to the day. Erasmus wrote several important non-political works under the surprising patronage of Thomas Bolyn: his \"Ennaratio triplex in Psalmum XXII\" or \"Triple Commentary on Psalm 23\" (1529); his catechism to counter Luther \"Explanatio Symboli\" or \"A Playne and Godly Exposition or Declaration of the Commune Crede\" (1533) which sold out in three hours at the Frankfurt Book Fair, and \"Praeparatio ad mortem\" or \"Preparation for Death\" (1534) which would be one of Erasmus' most popular and most hijacked works.\nFates of friends.\nIn the 1530s, life became more dangerous for Spanish Erasmians when Erasmus' protector, the Inquisitor General Alonso Manrique de Lara fell out of favour with the royal court and lost power within his own organization to friar-theologians. In 1532 Erasmus' friend, \"converso\" Juan de Vergara (Cisneros' Latin secretary who had worked on the Complutensian Polyglot and published Stunica's criticism of Erasmus) was arrested by the Spanish Inquisition and had to be ransomed from them by the humanist Archbishop of Toledo Alonso III Fonseca, also a correspondent of Erasmus', who had previously rescued Ignatius of Loyola from them.\nThere was a generational change in the Catholic hierarchy. In 1530, the reforming French bishop Guillaume Bri\u00e7onnet died. In 1532 his beloved long-time mentor English Primate Warham died of old age, as did reforming cardinal Giles of Viterbo and Swiss bishop Hugo von Hohenlandenberg. In 1534 his distrusted protector Clement VII (the \"inclement Clement\") died, his recent Italian ally Cardinal Cajetan (widely tipped as the next pope) died, and his old ally Cardinal Campeggio retired.\nAs more friends died (in 1533, his friend Pieter Gillis; in 1534, William Blount; in early 1536, Catherine of Aragon;) and as Luther and some Lutherans and some powerful Catholic theologians renewed their personal attacks on Erasmus, his letters are increasingly focused on concerns on the status of friendships and safety as he considered moving from bland Freiburg despite his health.\nIn 1535, Erasmus' friends Thomas More, Bishop John Fisher and the Brigittine monk Richard Reynolds were executed as pro-Rome traitors by Henry VIII, who Erasmus and More had first met as a boy. Despite illness Erasmus wrote the first biography of More (and Fisher), the short, anonymous \"Expositio Fidelis\", which Froben published, at the instigation of de G\u00f3is.\nAfter Erasmus' time, numerous of Erasmus' translators later met similar fates at the hands of Anglican, Catholic and Reformed sectarians and autocrats: including Margaret Pole, William Tyndale, Michael Servetus. Others, such as Charles V's Latin secretary Juan de Vald\u00e9s, fled and died in self-exile.\nErasmus' friend and collaborator Bishop Cuthbert Tunstall eventually died in prison under Elizabeth I for refusing the Oath of Supremacy. Erasmus' correspondent Bishop Stephen Gardiner, who he had known as a teenaged student in Paris and Cambridge, was later imprisoned in the Tower of London for five years under Edward VI for impeding Protestantism. Dami\u00e3o de G\u00f3is was tried before the Portuguese Inquisition at age 72, detained almost \"incommunicado\", finally exiled to a monastery, and on release perhaps murdered. His amanuensis Gilbert Cousin died in prison at age 66, shortly after being arrested on the personal order of Pope Pius V.\nDeath in Basel.\nWhen his strength began to fail, he finally decided to accept an invitation by Queen Mary of Hungary, Regent of the Netherlands (sister of his former student Archduke Ferdinand I and Emperor Charles V), to move from Freiburg to Brabant. In 1535, he moved back to the Froben compound in Basel in preparation (\u0152colampadius having died, and private practice of his religion now possible) and saw his last major works such as Ecclesiastes through publication, though he grew more frail.\nOn July 12, 1536, he died from an attack of dysentery. \"The most famous scholar of his day died in peaceful prosperity and in the company of celebrated and responsible friends.\" His last words, as recorded by his friend and biographer Beatus Rhenanus, were apparently \"Lord, put an end to it\" (, the same last words as Melanchthon) then \"Dear God\" ().\nHe had remained loyal to Roman Catholicism, but biographers have disagreed whether to treat him as an insider or an outsider. He may not have received or had the opportunity to receive the last rites of the Catholic Church; the contemporary reports of his death do not mention whether he asked for a Catholic priest or not, if any were secretly or privately in Basel.\nHe was buried with great ceremony in the Basel Minster (the former cathedral). The Protestant city authorities remarkably allowed his funeral to be an ecumenical Catholic requiem Mass.\nErasmus had received dispensations (from Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, and from Emperor Charles V in 1530) to make a will rather than have his wealth revert to his order (the Chapter of Sion), or to the state, and had long pre-sold most of his personal library of almost 500 books to Polish humanist Jan \u0141aski. \nAs his heir or executor he instated Bonifacius Amerbach to give seed money to students and the needy. One of the eventual recipients was the impoverished Protestant humanist Sebastian Castellio, who had fled from Geneva to Basel, who subsequently translated the Bible into Latin and French, and who worked for the repair of the breach and divide of Western Christianity in its Catholic, Anabaptist, and Protestant branches.\nThought and views.\nBiographers, such as Johan Huizinga, frequently draw connections between many of Erasmus' convictions and his early biography: esteem for the married state and appropriate marriages, support for priestly marriage, concern for improving marriage prospects for women, opposition to inconsiderate rules (notably, institutional dietary rules), a desire to make education engaging for the participants, interest in classical languages, horror of poverty and spiritual hopelessness, distaste for friars begging when they could study or work, unwillingness to be under the direct control of authorities, laicism, the need for those in authority to act in the best interest of their charges, a prizing of mercy and peace, an anger over unnecessary war, especially between avaricious princes, an awareness of mortality, etc.\nManner of thinking.\nErasmus had a distinctive manner of thinking, a Catholic historian suggests: one that is capacious in its perception, agile in its judgments, and unsettling in its irony with \"a deep and abiding commitment to human flourishing\". \"In all spheres, his outlook was essentially pastoral.\"\nErasmus has been called a seminal rather than a consistent or systematic thinker, notably averse to over-extending from the specific to the general; who nevertheless should be taken very seriously as a pastoral and rhetorical theologian, with a philological and historical approach\u2014rather than a metaphysical approach\u2014to interpreting Scripture and interested in the literal and tropological senses. French theologian Louis Bouyer commented, \"Erasmus was to be one of those who can get no edification from exegesis where they suspect some misinterpretation.\"\nA theologian has written of \"Erasmus' preparedness completely to satisfy no-one but himself.\" He has been called moderate, judicious and constructive even when being critical or when mocking extremes; but thin-skinned against slanders of heterodoxy.\nManner of expression.\nIrony.\nErasmus often wrote in a highly ironical idiom, especially in his letters, which makes them prone to different interpretations when taken literally rather than ironically.\nHe frequently wrote about controversial subjects using the dialogue to avoid direct statements clearly attributable to himself. For Martin Luther, he was an eel, slippery, evasive and impossible to capture. \nCopiousness.\nErasmus' literary theory of \"copiousness\" endorses a large stockpile of rich adages, analogies, tropes and symbolic figures, which leads to compressed communication of complex ideas (between those educated in the stockpile) but some of which, to modern sensibilities, may promote as well as play off stereotypes. \nTerence J. Martin identifies an \"Erasmian pattern\" that the supposed (by the reader) otherness (of Turks, Lapplanders, Indians, Amerindians, Jews, and even women and heretics) \"provides a foil against which the failures of Christian culture can be exposed and criticized.\" \nPacifism.\nPeace, peaceableness, and peacemaking, in all spheres from the domestic to the religious to the political, were central distinctives of Erasmus' writing on Christian living and his mystical theology: \"the sum and summary of our religion is peace and unanimity\" At the Nativity of Jesus \"\"the angels sang not the glories of war, nor a song of triumph, but a hymn of peace.\":\"\nErasmus was not an absolute pacifist but promoted political pacificism and religious Irenicism. Notable writings on irenicism include \"De Concordia\", \"On the War with the Turks\", \"The Education of a Christian Prince\", \"On Restoring the Concord of the Church\", and \"The Complaint of Peace\". Erasmus' ecclesiology of peacemaking held that the church authorities had a divine mandate to settle religious disputes, in an as non-excluding way as possible, including by the preferably-minimal development of doctrine.\nIn the latter, Lady Peace insists on peace as the crux of Christian life and for understanding Christ:\nA historian has called him \"The 16th Century's Pioneer of Peace Education and a Culture of Peace\".\nErasmus' emphasis on peacemaking reflects a typical pre-occupation of medieval lay spirituality as historian John Bossy (as summarized by Eamon Duffy) puts it: \"medieval Christianity had been fundamentally concerned with the creation and maintenance of peace in a violent world. \"Christianity\" in medieval Europe denoted neither an ideology nor an institution, but a community of believers whose religious ideal\u2014constantly aspired to if seldom attained\u2014was peace and mutual love.\" \nWar.\nHistorians have written that \"references to conflict run like a red thread through the writings of Erasmus.\" Erasmus had experienced war as a child and was particularly concerned about wars between Christian kings, who should be brothers and not start wars; a theme in his book \"The Education of a Christian Prince.\" His \"Adages\" included \"War is sweet to those who have never tasted it\" (\"\" from 's Greek.)\nHe promoted and was present at the Field of Cloth of Gold, and his wide-ranging correspondence frequently related to issues of peacemaking. He saw a key role of the Church in peacemaking by arbitration and mediation, and the office of the Pope was necessary to rein in tyrannical princes and bishops.\nHe questioned the practical usefulness and abuses of Just War theory, further limiting it to feasible defensive actions with popular support and that \"war should never be undertaken unless, as a last resort, it cannot be avoided.\" Defeat should be endured rather than fighting to the end. In his \"Adages\" he discusses (common translation) \", which owes to Cicero and John Colet's \"Better an unjust peace than the justest war.\"\" Expansionism could not be justified. Taxes to pay for war should cause the least possible hardship on the poor. He hated sedition as, often, a cause of oppression.\nErasmus was highly critical of the warlike way of important European princes of his era, including some princes of the church. He described these princes as corrupt and greedy. Erasmus believed that these princes \"collude in a game, of which the outcome is to exhaust and oppress the commonwealth\". He spoke more freely about this matter in letters sent to his friends like Thomas More, Beatus Rhenanus and Adrianus Barlandus: a particular target of his criticisms was the Emperor Maximilian I, whom Erasmus blamed for allegedly preventing the Netherlands from signing a peace treaty with Guelders and other schemes to cause wars in order to extract money from his subjects.\nOne of his approaches was to send and publish congratulatory and lionizing letters to princes who, though in a position of strength, negotiated peace with neighbours, such as King Sigismund I the Old of Poland in 1527.\nErasmus \"constantly and consistently\" opposed the mooted idea of a Christian \"universal monarch\" with an over-extended empire who could supposedly defeat the Ottoman forces: such universalism did not \"hold any promise of generating less conflict than the existing political plurality;\" instead, advocating concord between princes, both temporal and spiritual. The spiritual princes, by their arbitration and mediation do not \"threaten political plurality, but acts as its defender.\"\nIntra-Christian religious toleration.\nHe referred to his irenical disposition in the Preface to On Free Will as a \"secret inclination of nature\" that would make him even prefer the views of the Sceptics over intolerant assertions, though he sharply distinguished \"adiaphora\" from what was uncontentiously explicit in the New Testament or absolutely mandated by Church teaching. Concord demanded unity and assent: Erasmus was anti-sectarian as well as non-sectarian. To follow the law of love, our intellects must be humble and friendly when making any assertions: he called contention \"earthly, beastly, demonic\" and a good-enough reason to reject a teacher or their followers. In Melanchthon's view, Erasmus taught charity, not faith. The centrality of Christian concord to Erasmus' theology contrasted with the insistence of Martin Luther and, for example, later English Puritans, that (Protestant) truth naturally would create discord and opposition.\nCertain works of Erasmus laid a foundation for religious toleration of private opinions and ecumenism. For example, in \"De libero arbitrio\", opposing particular views of Martin Luther, Erasmus noted that religious disputants should be temperate in their language \"because in this way the truth, which is often lost amidst too much wrangling may be more surely perceived.\" Gary Remer writes, \"Like Cicero, Erasmus concludes that truth is furthered by a more harmonious relationship between interlocutors.\"\nIn a letter to Cardinal Lorenzo Campeggio, Erasmus lobbied diplomatically for toleration: \"If the sects could be tolerated under certain conditions (as the Bohemians pretend), it would, I admit, be a grievous misfortune, but one more endurable than war.\" But the same dedication to avoiding conflict and bloodshed should be shown by those tempted to join (anti-popist) sects:\nHeresy and sedition.\nErasmus had been involved in early attempts to protect Luther and his sympathisers from charges of heresy. Erasmus wrote \"Inquisitio de fide\" to say that the Lutherans (of 1523) were not formally heretics: he pushed back against the willingness of some theologians to cry heresy fast in order to enforce their views in universities and at inquisitions.\nFor Erasmus, punishable heresy had to involve fractiously, dangerously, and publicly agitating against essential doctrines relating to Christ (i.e., blasphemy), with malice, depravity, obstinacy. As with St Theodore the Studite, Erasmus was against the death penalty merely for private or peaceable heresy or for dissent on non-essentials: \"It is better to cure a sick man than to kill him.\" The Church has the duty to protect believers and convert or heal heretics; he invoked Jesus' parable of the wheat and tares.\nErasmus' pacificism included a particular dislike for sedition, which caused warfare:\nErasmus allowed the death penalty against violent seditionists to prevent bloodshed and war: he allowed that the state has the right to execute those who are a necessary danger to public order\u2014whether heretic or orthodox\u2014but noted (e.g., to ) that Augustine had been against the execution of even violent Donatists: Johannes Trapman states that Erasmus' endorsement of suppression of the Anabaptists springs from their refusal to heed magistrates and the criminal violence of the M\u00fcnster rebellion not because of their heretical views on baptism. Despite these concessions to state power, Erasmus suggested that religious persecution could still be challenged as inexpedient (ineffective). \nOutsiders.\nMost of his political writing focused on peace within Christendom with almost a sole focus on Europe. In 1516, Erasmus wrote, \"It is the part of a Christian prince to regard no one as an outsider unless he is a nonbeliever, and even on them he should inflict no harm\", which entails not attacking outsiders, not taking their riches, not subjecting them to political rule, no forced conversions, and keeping promises made to them.\nIn common with his times, Erasmus regarded the Jewish and Islamic religions as Christian heresies (and therefore competitors to orthodox Christianity) rather than separate religions, using the inclusive term \"half-Christian\" for the latter.\nHowever, there is a wide range of scholarly opinion on the extent and nature of antisemitic and anti-Moslem prejudice in his writings: historian Nathan Ron has found his writing to be harsh and racial in its implications, with contempt and hostility to Islam.\nTurks.\nIn his last decade, he involved himself in the public policy debate on war with the Ottoman Empire, which was then invading , notably in his book \"On the war against the Turks\" (1530), as the \"reckless and extravagant\" Pope Leo X had in previous decades promoted going on the offensive with a new crusade. Erasmus re-worked Luther's rhetoric that the invading Turks represent God's judgment of decadent Christendom, but without Luther's fatalism: Erasmus not only accused Western leaders of kingdom-threatening hypocrisy, he reworked a remedy already decreed by the Fifth Council of the Lateran: anti-expansionist moral reforms by Europe's disunited leaders as a necessary unitive political step before any aggressive warfare against the Ottoman threat, reforms which might themselves, if sincere, prevent both the internecine and foreign warfare.\nJews.\nErasmus perceived and championed strong Hellenistic rather than exclusively Hebraic influences on the intellectual milieux of Jesus, Paul, and the early church: \"If only the Christian church did not attach so much importance to the Old Testament!\" Perhaps the only Jewish book he published was his loose translation of the first century Hellenistic-Judaic \"On the Sovereignty of Reason\", better known as 4 Maccabees. \nErasmus' pervasive anti-ceremonialism treated the early Church debates on circumcision, food, and special days as manifestations of cultural chauvinism by the initial Jewish Christians in Antioch.\nWhile many humanists, from Pico della Mirandola to Johannes Reuchlin, were intrigued by Jewish mysticism, Erasmus came to dislike it: \"I see them as a nation full of most tedious fabrications, who spread a kind of fog over everything, Talmud, Cabbala, Tetragrammaton, Gates of Light, words, words, words. I would rather have Christ mixed up with Scotus than with that rubbish of theirs.\"\nIn his \"Paraphrase on Romans\", Erasmus voiced, as Paul, the \"secret\" that in the end times, \"all of the Israelites will be restored to salvation\" and accept Christ as their Messiah, \"although now part of them have fallen away from it.\"\nSeveral scholars have identified cases where Erasmus' comments appear to go beyond theological anti-Judaism into slurs or approving to an extent certain anti-semitic policies, though there is some controversy.\nSlaves.\nOn the subject of slavery, Erasmus characteristically treated it in passing under the topic of tyranny: Christians were not allowed to be tyrants, which slave-owning required, but especially not to be the masters of other Christians. Erasmus had various other piecemeal arguments against slavery: for example, that it was not legitimate to enslave people taken in an unjust war, but it was not a subject that occupied him. However, his belief that \"nature created all men free\" (and slavery was imposed) was a rejection of Aristotle's category of natural slaves.\nPolitics.\nErasmus promoted the idea that a prince rules with the consent of his people, notably in his book \"The Education of a Christian Prince\" (and, through More, in the book Utopia.) He may have been influenced by the Brabantine custom of an incoming ruler being officially told of his duties and welcomed: the Joyous Entry was a kind of contract. A monarchy should not be absolute: it should be \"checked and diluted with a mixture of aristocracy and democracy to prevent it ever breaking out into tyranny.\" The same considerations applied to church princes.\nErasmus contrasts the Christian Prince with the Tyrant, who has no love from the people, will be surrounded by flatterers, and can expect no loyalty or peace. Unspoken in Erasmus' views may have been the idea that the people can remove a tyrant; however, espousing this explicitly could expose people to capital charges of sedition or treason. Erasmus typically limited his political discussion to what could be couched as personal faith and morality by or between Christians, his business as a \"magister\" of theology.\nReligious reform.\nPersonal reform.\nErasmus expressed much of his reform program in terms of the proper attitude towards the sacraments and their ramifications: notably for the underappreciated sacraments of Baptism and Marriage (see \"On the Institution of Christian Marriage\") considered as vocations more than events; and for the mysterious Eucharist, pragmatic Confession, the dangerous Last Rites (writing \"On the Preparation for Death\"), and the pastoral Holy Orders (see \"Ecclesiastes\".) Historians have noted that Erasmus commended the benefits of immersive, docile scripture-reading in sacramental terms.\nSacraments.\nA test of the Reformation was the doctrine of the sacraments, and the crux of this question was the observance of the Eucharist. Erasmus was concerned that the sacramentarians, headed by \u0152colampadius of Basel, were claiming Erasmus held views similar to their own in order to try to claim him for their schismatic and \"erroneous\" movement. When the Mass was finally banned in Basel in 1529, Erasmus immediately abandoned the city, as did the other expelled Catholic clergy.\nIn 1530, Erasmus published a new edition of the orthodox treatise of Algerus against the heretic Berengar of Tours in the eleventh century. He added a dedication, affirming his belief in the reality of the Body of Christ after consecration in the Eucharist, commonly referred to as transubstantiation. However, Erasmus found the scholastic formulation of transubstantiation to stretch language past its breaking point.\nBy and large, the miraculous real change that interested Erasmus, the author, more than that of the bread is the transformation in the humble partaker. Erasmus wrote several notable pastoral books and pamphlets on sacraments, always looking through rather than at the rituals or forms: \nCatholic reform.\nInstitutional reforms.\nThe Protestant Reformation began in the year following the publication of his pathbreaking edition of the New Testament in Latin and Greek (1516). The issues between the reforming and reactionary tendencies of the church, from which Protestantism later emerged, had become so clear that many intellectuals and churchmen could not escape the summons to join the debate.\nAccording to historian C. Scott Dixon, Erasmus not only criticized church failings but questioned many of his Church's basic teachings; however, according to biographer Erika Rummel, \"Erasmus was aiming at the correction of abuses rather than at doctrinal innovation or institutional change.\"\nIn theologian Louis Bouyer's interpretation, Erasmus' agenda was \"to reform the Church from within by a renewal of biblical theology, based on philological study of the New Testament text, and supported by a knowledge of patristics, itself renewed by the same methods. The final object of it all was to nourish[...]chiefly moral and spiritual reform[...]\"\nAt the height of his literary fame, Erasmus was called upon to take one side, but public partisanship was foreign to his beliefs, nature, and habits. Despite all his criticism of clerical corruption and abuses within the Western Church, especially at first he sided unambiguously with neither Luther nor the anti-Lutherans publicly (though in private he lobbied assiduously against extremism from both parties), but eventually shunned the breakaway Protestant Reformation movements along with their most radical offshoots.\nThe world had laughed at his satire, \"The Praise of Folly\", but few had interfered with his activities. He believed that his work had commended itself to the religious world's best minds and dominant powers. Erasmus chose to write in Latin (and Greek), the languages of scholars. He did not build a large body of supporters in the unlettered; his critiques reached a small but elite audience.\nErasmus was also notable for exposing several important historical documents of theological and political importance as forgeries or misattributions: including pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, the \"Gravi de pugna\" attributed to St Augustine, the Ad Herennium attributed to Cicero, and (by reprinting Lorenzo Valla's work) the Donation of Constantine.\nAnti-fraternalism.\nReacting from his own experiences, Erasmus came to believe that monastic life and institutions no longer served the positive spiritual or social purpose they once may have: in the \"Enchiridion\" he controversially put it \"Monkishness is not piety.\" At this time, it was better to live as \"a monk in the world\" than in the monastery.\nMany of his works contain diatribes against supposed monastic corruption and careerism, particularly against the mendicant friars (Franciscans and Dominicans). These orders also typically ran the university's Scholastic theology programs, from whose ranks came his most dangerous enemies. The more some attacked him, the more offensive he became about what he saw as their political influence and materialistic opportunism.\nHe was scandalized by superstitions, such as that if you were buried in a Franciscan habit, you would go direct to heaven. crime and child novices. He advocated various reforms, including a ban on taking orders until the 30th year, the closure of corrupt and smaller monasteries, respect for bishops, requiring work, not begging (reflecting the practice of his own order of Augustinian Canons,) the downplaying of monastic hours, fasts and ceremonies, and a less mendacious approach to gullible pilgrims and tenants.\nHowever, he was not in favour of speedy closures of monasteries, nor of closing larger reformed monasteries with important libraries: in his account of his pilgrimage to Walsingham, he noted that the funds extracted from pilgrims typically supported houses for the poor and elderly.\nThese ideas widely influenced his generation of humanists, both Catholic and Protestant, and the lurid hyperbolic attacks in his half-satire \"The Praise of Folly\" were later treated by Protestants as objective reports of near-universal corruption. Furthermore, \"what is said over a glass of wine, ought not to be remembered and written down as a serious statement of belief,\" such as his proposal to marry all monks to all nuns or to send them all away to fight the Turks and colonize new islands.\nHe believed the only vow necessary for Christians should be the vow of Baptism, and others such as the vows of the evangelical counsels, while admirable in intent and content, were now mainly counter-productive.\nHowever, Erasmus frequently commended the evangelical counsels for all believers, and with more than lip service: for example, the first adage of his reputation-establishing \"Adagia\" was \"Between friends all is common\", where he tied common ownership (such as practiced by his order's style of poverty) with the teachings of classical philosophers and Christ.\nHis main Catholic opposition was from scholars in the mendicant orders. He purported that \"Saint Francis came lately to me in a dream and thanked me for chastising them.\" After his lifetime, scholars of mendicant orders have sometimes disputed Erasmus as hyperbolic and ill-informed. A 20th-century Benedictine scholar wrote of him as \"all sail and no rudder\".\nErasmus did also have significant support and contact with reform-minded friars, including Franciscans such as Jean Vitrier and Cardinal Cisneros, and Dominicans such as Cardinal Cajetan the former master of the Order of Preachers.\nProtestant reform.\nThe early reformers built their theology on Erasmus' philological analyses of specific verses in the New Testament: repentance over penance (the basis of the first thesis of the Luther's 95 Theses), justification by imputation, grace as favour or clemency, faith as hoping trust, human transformation over reformation, congregation over church, mystery over sacrament, etc. In Erasmus' view, they went too far, downplayed Sacred Tradition such as Patristic interpretations, and irresponsibly fomented bloodshed.\nErasmus was one of many scandalized by the sale of indulgences to fund Pope Leo X's projects. His view, given in a 1518 letter to John Colet, was less theological than political: \"The Roman curia has abandoned any sense of shame. What could be more shameless than these constant indulgences? And now they put up war against the Turks as a pretext, when their aim really is to drive the Spaniards from Naples.\"\nIncreasing disagreement with Luther.\nErasmus and Luther impacted each other greatly. Each had misgivings about each other from the beginning (Erasmus on Luther's rash and antagonistic character, Luther on Erasmus' focus on morality rather than grace) but strategically agreed not to be negative about the other in public.\nNoting Luther's criticisms of corruption in the Church, Erasmus described Luther to Pope Leo X as \"a mighty trumpet of gospel truth\" while agreeing, \"It is clear that many of the reforms for which Luther calls\" (e.g., the sale of indulgences) \"are urgently needed.\" However, behind the scenes Erasmus forbade his publisher Froben from handling the works of Luther and tried to keep the reform movement focused on institutional rather than theological issues, yet he also privately wrote to authorities to prevent Luther's persecution. In the words of one historian, \"at this earlier period he was more concerned with the fate of Luther than his theology.\"\nIn 1520, Erasmus wrote that \"Luther ought to be answered and not crushed.\" However, the publication of Luther's \"On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church\" (Oct 1520) and subsequent bellicosity drained Erasmus' and many humanists' sympathy, even more as Christians became partisans and the partisans took to violence.\nLuther hoped for his cooperation in a work which seemed only the natural outcome of Erasmus' own, and spoke with admiration of Erasmus's superior learning. In their early correspondence, Luther expressed boundless admiration for all Erasmus had done in the cause of a sound and reasonable Christianity and urged him to join the Lutheran party. Erasmus declined to commit himself, arguing his usual \"small target\" excuse, that to do so would endanger the cause of which he regarded as one of his purposes in life. Only as an independent scholar could he hope to influence the reform of religion. When Erasmus declined to support him, the \"straightforward\" Luther became angered that Erasmus was avoiding the responsibility due either to cowardice or a lack of purpose.\nHowever, any hesitancy on the part of Erasmus may have stemmed, not from lack of courage or conviction, but rather from a concern over the mounting disorder and violence of the reform movement. To Philip Melanchthon in 1524 he wrote:\nI know nothing of your church; at the very least it contains people who will, I fear, overturn the whole system and drive the princes into using force to restrain good men and bad alike. The gospel, the word of God, faith, Christ, and Holy Spirit \u2013 these words are always on their lips; look at their lives and they speak quite another language.\nCatholic theologian George Chantraine notes that, where Luther quotes Luke 11:21 \"He that is not with me is against me\", Erasmus takes Mark 9:40 \"For he that is not against us, is on our part.\"\nThough he sought to remain accommodative in doctrinal disputes, each side accused him of siding with the other, perhaps because of his perceived influence and what they regarded as his dissembling neutrality, which he regarded as peacemaking accommodation:\nDispute on free will.\nBy 1523, and first suggested in a letter from Henry VIII, Erasmus had been convinced that Luther's ideas on necessity/free will were a subject of core disagreement deserving a public airing, and strategized with friends and correspondents on how to respond with proper moderation without making the situation worse for all, especially for the humanist reform agenda. He eventually chose a campaign that involved an irenical 'dialogue' \"\"The Inquisition of Faith\", a positive, evangelical model sermon \"On the Measureless Mercy of God\", and a gently critical 'diatribe' \"On Free Will\".\"\nThe publication of his brief book \"On Free Will\" initiated what has been called \"The greatest debate of that era\" which still has ramifications today. They bypassed discussion on reforms which they both agreed on in general, and instead dealt with authority and biblical justifications of synergism versus monergism in relation to salvation.\nLuther responded with \"On the Bondage of the Will (De servo arbitrio)\" (1525).\nErasmus replied to this in his lengthy two volume \"Hyperaspistes\" and other works, which Luther ignored. Apart from the perceived moral failings among followers of the Reformers\u2014an important sign for Erasmus\u2014he also dreaded any change in doctrine, citing the long history of the Church as a bulwark against innovation. He put the matter bluntly to Luther:\nContinuing his chastisement of Luther \u2013 and undoubtedly put off by the notion of there being \"no pure interpretation of Scripture anywhere but in Wittenberg\" \u2013 Erasmus touches upon another important point of the controversy:\n\"False evangelicals\".\nIn 1529, Erasmus wrote \"An epistle against those who falsely boast they are Evangelicals\" to Gerardus Geldenhouwer (former Bishop of Utrecht, also schooled at Deventer).\nHere Erasmus complains of the doctrines and morals of the Reformers, applying the same critique he had made about public Scholastic disputations:\nOther.\nAccording to historian Christopher Ocker, the early reformers \"needed tools that let their theological distinctions pose as commonplaces in a textual theology;[...] Erasmus provided the tools\" but this tendentious distinction-making, reminiscent of the recent excesses of Scholasticism to Erasmus' eyes, was \"was precisely what Erasmus disliked about Luther\" and \"Protestant polemicists.\"\nErasmus wrote books against aspects of the teaching, impacts or threats of several other Reformers:\nHowever, Erasmus maintained friendly relations with other Protestants, notably the irenic Melanchthon and Albrecht Duerer.\nA common accusation, supposedly started by antagonistic monk-theologians, made Erasmus responsible for Martin Luther and the Reformation: \"Erasmus laid the egg, and Luther hatched it.\" Erasmus wittily dismissed the charge, claiming that Luther had \"hatched a different bird entirely\". Erasmus-reader Peter Canisius commented: \"Certainly there was no lack of eggs for Luther to hatch.\"\nPhilosophy.\nErasmus has a problematic standing in the history of philosophy: whether he should be called a philosopher at all, (as, indeed, some question whether he should be considered a theologian either.) Erasmus deemed himself to be a rhetorician (rhetoric being the art of argumentation to find what was most probably true on questions where logic could not provide certainty) or grammarian rather than a philosopher. He was particularly influenced by satirist and rhetorician Lucian. Erasmus' writings shifted \"an intellectual culture from logical disputation about things to quarrels about texts, contexts, and words.\"\nClassical.\nErasmus syncretistically took phrases, ideas and motifs from many classical philosophers to furnish discussions of Christian themes: academics have identified aspects of his thought as variously Platonist (duality), Cynical (asceticism),\n Stoic (adiaphora), Epicurean (ataraxia, pleasure as virtue), realist/non-voluntarist,\nand Isocratic (rhetoric, political education, syncretism.) However, his Christianized version of Epicureanism is regarded as his own.\nErasmus was sympathetic to a kind of epistemological (Ciceronian not Cartesian) Scepticism:\nHistorian Kirk Essary has noted that from his earliest to last works Erasmus \"regularly denounced the Stoics as specifically unchristian in their hardline position and advocacy of \"apatheia\"\": warm affection and an appropriately fiery heart being inalienable parts of human sincerity; however historian Ross Dealy sees Erasmus' decrial of other non-gentle \"perverse affections\" as having Stoical roots.\nErasmus wrote in terms of a tri-partite nature of man, with the soul the seat of free will:\nAccording to theologian George van Kooten, Erasmus was the first modern scholar \"to note the similarities between Plato's \"Symposium\" and John's Gospel\", first in the \"Enchiridion\" then in the \"Adagia\", pre-dating other scholarly interest by 400 years.\nAnti-scholasticism.\nHe usually eschewed metaphysical, epistemological and logical philosophy as found in Aristotle: in particular the curriculum and systematic methods of the post-Aquinas Schoolmen (Scholastics) and what he regarded as their frigid, counter-productive Aristoteleanism: \"What has Aristotle to do with Christ?\"\nErasmus held that academics must avoid philosophical factionalism as an offense against Christian concord, in order to \"make the whole world Christian.\" Indeed, Erasmus thought that Scholastic philosophy actually distracted participants from their proper focus on immediate morality, unless used moderately. And, by \"excluding the Platonists from their commentaries, they strangle the beauty of revelation.\" \"They are windbags blown up with Aristotle, sausages stuffed with a mass of theoretical definitions, conclusions, and propositions.\"\nNevertheless, church historian has commented on a certain closeness of Erasmus' thought to Thomas Aquinas', despite Erasmus' skepticism about runaway Aristotelianism and his methodological dislike of collections of disconnected sentences for quotation. Ultimately, Erasmus personally owned Aquinas' \"Summa theologiae\", the \"Catena aurea\" and his commentary on Paul's epistles.\n\"Philosophia Christi\".\nErasmus approached classical philosophers theologically and rhetorically: their value was in how they pre-saged, explained or amplified the unique teachings of Christ (particularly the Sermon on the Mount): the \"philosophia Christi\". \nIn fact, Christ was \"the very father of philosophy\" (\"Anti-Barbieri\".)\nIn works such as his \"Enchiridion\", The Education of a Christian Prince and the Colloquies, Erasmus developed his idea of the \"philosophia Christi\", a life lived according to the teachings of Jesus taken as a spiritual-ethical-social-political-legal philosophy:\nIn philosopher \u00c9tienne Gilson's summary: \"the quite precise goal he pursues is to reject Greek philosophy outside of Christianity, into which the Middle Ages introduced Greek philosophy with the risk of corrupting this Christian Wisdom.\"\nUseful \"philosophy\" needed to be limited to (or re-defined as) the practical and moral: \nTheology.\nThree key distinctive features of the spirituality Erasmus proposed are accommodation, inverbation, and \"scopus christi\". \nIn the view of literary historian Chester Chapin, Erasmus' tendency of thought was \"towards cautious \"dulcification\" of the traditional [Catholic] view\".\nAccommodation.\nHistorian Manfred Hoffmann has described accommodation as \"the single most important concept in Erasmus' hermeneutic\".\nFor Erasmus, accommodation is a universal concept: humans must accommodate each other, must accommodate the church and \"vice versa\", and must take as their model how Christ accommodated the disciples in his interactions with them, and accommodated humans in his incarnation; which in turn merely reflects the eternal mutual accommodation within the Trinity. And the primary mechanism of accommodation is language, which mediates between reality and abstraction, which allows disputes of all kinds to be resolved and the gospel to be transmitted: in his New Testament, Erasmus notably translated the Greek \"logos\" in \"In the beginning was the Word\" more like \"In the beginning was Speech: using Latin \"sermo\" (discourse, conversation, language) not \"verbum\" (word) emphasizing the dynamic and interpersonal communication rather than static principle: \"Christ incarnate as the eloquent oration of God\": \"He is called Speech [sermo], because through him God, who in his own nature cannot be comprehended by any reasoning, wished to become known to us.\"\nThe role models of accommodation were Paul, that \"chameleon\" (or \"slippery squid\") and Christ, who was \"more mutable than Proteus himself.\"\nFollowing Paul, Quintillian (\"apte diecere\") and Gregory the Great's \"Pastoral Care\", Erasmus wrote that the orator, preacher or teacher must \"adapt their discourse to the characteristics of their audience\"; this made pastoral care the \"art of arts\". Erasmus wrote that most of his original works, from satires to paraphrases, were essentially the same themes packaged for different audiences.\nIn this light, Erasmus' ability to have friendly correspondence with both Thomas More and Thomas Bolyn, and with both Philip Melanchthon and Pope Adrian VI, can be seen as outworkings of his theology, rather than slippery insincerity or flattery of potential patrons. Similarly, it shows the theological basis of his pacificism, and his view of ecclesiastical authorities\u2014from priests like himself to Church Councils\u2014as necessary mediating peace-brokers.\nInverbation.\nFor Erasmus, further to accommodating humans in his Incarnation, Christ accommodated humans by a kind of \"inverbation\": we now knowing the resurrection, Christ is revealed by the Gospels in a way that we can know him better by reading him than those who actually heard him speak; this will or may transform us.\nSince the Gospels become in effect like sacraments, for Erasmus reading them becomes a form of prayer which is spoiled by taking single sentences in isolation and using them as syllogisms. Instead, learning to understand the context, genres and literary expression in the New Testament becomes a spiritual more than academic exercise. Erasmus' has been called rhetorical theology (\"theologia rhetorica\".)\nScopus christi.\n\"Scopus\" is the unifying reference point, the navigation goal, or the organizing principle of topics. According to his assistant-turned-foe, \u0152colampadius, Erasmus's rule was \"nihil in sacris literis praeter Christum quaerendum\" (\"nothing is to be sought in the sacred letters but Christ\").\nIn Hoffmann's words, for Erasmus \"Christ is the \"scopus\" of everything\": \"the focus in which both dimensions of reality, the human and the divine, intersect\" and so He himself is the hermeneutical principle of scripture\": \"the middle is the medium, the medium is the mediator, the mediator is the reconciler\". In Erasmus' early \"Enchiridion\" he had given this \"scopus\" in typical medieval terms of an ascent of being to God (vertical), but from the mid-1510s life he moved to an analogy of Copernican planetary circling around Christ the centre (horizontal) or Columbian navigation towards a destination.\nOne effect is that scriptural interpretation must be done starting with the teachings and interactions of Jesus in the Gospels, with the Sermon on the Mount serving as the starting point, and arguably with the Beatitudes and the Lord's Prayer at the head of the queue. This privileges peacemaking, mercy, meekness, purity of heart, hungering after righteousness, poverty of spirit, etc. as the unassailable core of Christianity and piety and true theology.\nThe Sermon on the Mount provides the axioms on which every legitimate theology must be built, as well as the ethics governing theological discourse, and the rules for validating theological products; Erasmus' \"philosophia christi\" treats the primary and initial teaching of Jesus in the first Gospel as a theological methodology.\nFor example, \"peacemaking\" is a possible topic in any Christian theology; but for Erasmus, from the Beatitude, it must be a starting-, reference- and ending-point when discussing all other theological notions, such as church authority, the Trinity, etc. Moreover, Christian theology must only be \"done\" in a peacemaking fashion for peacemaking purposes; and any theology that promotes division and warmongering is thereby anti-Christian. \nMystical theology.\nAnother important concept to Erasmus was \"the Folly of the Cross\" (which \"The Praise of Folly\" explored): the view that Truth belongs to the exuberant, perhaps ecstatic, world of what is foolish, strange, unexpected and even superficially repellent to us, rather than to the frigid worlds which intricate scholastic dialectical and syllogistic philosophical argument all too often generated; this produced in Erasmus a profound disinterest in hyper-rationality, and an emphasis on verbal, rhetorical, mystical, pastoral and personal/political moral concerns instead.\nTheological writings.\nSeveral scholars have suggested Erasmus wrote as an evangelist not an academic theologian. Even \"theology was to be metamorphic speech, converting persons to Christ.\" Erasmus did not conceive of Christianity as fundamentally an intellectual system:\nHistorian William McCuaig commented \"I have never read a work by him on any subject that was not at bottom a piece of evangelical literature.\"\nApart from these programmatic works, Erasmus also produce a number of prayers, sermons, essays, masses and poems for specific benefactors and occasions, often on topics where Erasmus and his benefactor agreed. His thought was particularly influenced by Origen.\nHe often set himself the challenge of formulating positive, moderate, non-superstitious versions of contemporary Catholic practices that might be more acceptable both to scandalized Catholics and Protestants of good will: the better attitudes to the sacraments, saints, Mary, indulgences, statues, scriptural ignorance and fanciful Biblical interpretation, prayer, dietary fasts, external ceremonialism, authority, vows, docility, submission to Rome, etc. For example, in his \"Paean in Honour of the Virgin Mary\" (1503) Erasmus elaborated his theme that the Incarnation had been hinted far and wide, which could impact the theology of the fate of the remote unbaptized and grace, and the place of classical philosophy:\nWorks.\nErasmus was the most popular, most printed and arguably most influential author of the early sixteenth century, read in all nations in the West and frequently translated. By the 1530s, his writings accounted for 10\u201320% of book sales in Europe. \"Undoubtedly he was the most read author of his age.\" His vast number of Latin and Greek publications included translations, paraphrases, letters, textbooks, plays for schoolboys, commentary, poems, liturgies, satires, sermons, and prayers. A large number of his later works were defences of his earlier work from attacks by Catholic and Protestant theological and literary opponents.\nThe \"Catalogue of the Works of Erasmus\" (2023) runs to 444 entries (120 pages), almost all from the latter half of his life. He usually wrote books in particular classical literary genres with their different rhetorical conventions: complaint, diatribe, dialogue, encomium, epistle, commentary, liturgy, sermon, etc. His letter to Ulrich von Hutten on Thomas More's household has been called \"the first real biography in the real modern sense.\"\nFrom his youth, Erasmus had been a voracious writer. Erasmus wrote or answered up to 40 letters per day, usually waking early in the morning and writing them in his own hand. He did not work after dinner. His writing method (recommended in \"De copia\" and \"De ratione studii\") was to make notes on whatever he was reading, categorized by theme: he carted these commonplaces in boxes that accompanied him. When assembling a new book, he would go through the topics and cross out commonplace notes as he used them. This catalog of research notes allowed him to rapidly create books, though woven from the same topics. Towards the end of his life, as he lost dexterity, he employed secretaries or amanuenses who performed the assembly or transcription, re-wrote his writing, and in his last decade, recorded his dictation; letters were usually in his own hand, unless formal. For much of his career he wrote standing at a desk, as shown in D\u00fcrer's portrait.\nNotable writings.\nErasmus wrote for educated audiences both\nHe is noted for his extensive scholarly editions of the New Testament in Latin and Greek, and the complete works of numerous Church Fathers. These formed the basis of the so-called Textus Receptus Protestant bibles.\nThe only works with enduring popularity in modern time are his satires and semi-satires: \"The Praise of Folly\", \"Julius Excluded from Heaven\" and \"The Complaint of Peace\". However, his other works, such as his several thousand letters, continue to be a vital source of information to historians of numerous disciplines.\nLegacy and evaluations.\nErasmus was given the sobriquet \"Prince of the Humanists\", and has been called \"the crowning glory of the Christian humanists\". He has also been called \"the most illustrious rhetorician and educationalist of the Renaissance\".\nHowever, at times he has been viciously criticized, his works suppressed, his expertise corralled, his writings misinterpreted, his thought demonized, and his legacy marginalized. He was never judged and declared a heretic by the Catholic Church, during his lifetime or after: a semi-secret trial in Vallodolid Spain, in 1527 found him not to be a heretic, and he was sponsored and protected by Popes and Bishops.\nPersonal.\nHealth.\nErasmus was a quite sickly man and frequently worked from his sickbed. As a teenager he contracted Quartan fever, a non-lethal type of Malaria which recurred numerous times for the rest of his life: he attributed his survival to the intercession of St Genevieve. His digestion gave him trouble: he was intolerant of fish, beer and some wines, which were the standard diet for members of religious orders; he eventually died following an attack of dysentery.\nIn Cambridge he was ill, possibly with the English sweating sickness. He suffered kidney stones from his time in Venice and, in late life, with gout In 1514, he suffered a fall from his horse and injured his back.\nIn 1528 he suffered recurrent episodes of the stone, \"from which he almost died.\"\nIn 1529 his self-removal from Basel was delayed because of headcold and fever. In 1530 while traveling he suffered some near-fatal illness which several doctors diagnosed as the plague (which had killed his parents) but several others diagnosed as not the plague.\nVarious illnesses have been diagnosed of the skeletons claimed to be his, including pustulotic arthro-osteitis, syphilis or yaws. Other doctors have diagnosed from his written descriptions ailments such as rheumatoid arthritis, enteric rheumatism and spondylarthritis.\nClothing.\nUntil Erasmus received his 1505 and 1517 Papal dispensations to wear clerical garb, Erasmus wore versions of the local habit of his order, the Canons regular of St Augustine, Chapter of Sion, which varied by region and house, unless travelling: in general, a white or perhaps black cassock with linen and lace choir rochet for liturgical contexts, or otherwise with white ' (scarf) (over left shoulder), or almuce (cape), perhaps with an asymmetrical black cope of cloth or sheepskin (') or long black cloak.\nFrom 1505, and certainly after 1517, he dressed as a scholar-priest. He preferred warm and soft garments: according to one source, he arranged for his clothing to be stuffed with fur to protect him against the cold, and his habit counted with a collar of fur which usually covered his nape.\nAll Erasmus' portraits show him wearing a knitted scholar's bonnet.\nSignet ring and personal motto.\nErasmus chose the Roman god of borders and boundaries Terminus as a personal symbol and had a signet ring with a herm he thought depicted Terminus carved into a carnelian. The herm was presented to him in Rome by his student Alexander Stewart and in reality depicted the Greek god Dionysus. The ring was also depicted in a portrait of his by the Flemish painter Quentin Matsys.\nThe herm became part of the Erasmus branding at Froben, and is on his tombstone. In the early 1530s, Erasmus was portrayed as Terminus by Hans Holbein the Younger.\nHe chose \"\" (Lat. \"I concede to no-one\") as his personal motto. The obverse of the medal by Quintin Matsys featured the Terminus herm. Mottoes on medals, along the circumference, included \"A better picture of Erasmus is shown in his writing\", and \"Contemplate the end of a long life\" and Horace's \"Death is the ultimate boundary of things,\" which re-casts the motto as a \"memento mori\".\nRepresentations.\nErasmus frequently gifted portraits and medals with his image to friends and patrons.\nExhumation.\nIn 1928, the site of Erasmus' grave was dug up, and a body identified in the bones and examined. In 1974, a body was dug up in a slightly different location, accompanied by an Erasmus medal. Both bodies have been claimed to be Erasmus'. However, it is possible neither is."}
{"id": "10153", "revid": "1153284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10153", "title": "Encyclopedia Brown", "text": "Encyclopedia Brown is a series of books featuring the adventures of boy detective Leroy Brown, nicknamed \"Encyclopedia\" for his intelligence and range of knowledge. The 29 books in the children's literature series were written (one co-written) by Donald J. Sobol, with the first book published in 1963 and the last published posthumously in 2012. In addition to the main books, the \"Encyclopedia Brown\" series has spawned a comic strip, a TV series, and compilation books of puzzles and games.\nSobol's first \"Encyclopedia Brown\" book was written in two weeks; subsequent books took about six months to write. Its main publisher was Bantam Skylark.\nStyle.\nEach book in the \"Encyclopedia Brown\" mystery series is self contained in that the reader is not required to have read earlier books in order to understand the stories. The major characters, settings, etc. are usually introduced (or reintroduced) in each book.\nBooks featuring Brown are subdivided into a number\u2014usually ten or more\u2014of (possibly interlinked) short stories, each of which presents a mystery. The mysteries are intended to be solved by the reader, thanks to the placement of a logical or factual inconsistency somewhere within the text. This is very similar to the layout of Donald Sobol's other book series, \"Two-Minute Mysteries\". Many of the mysteries involve Brown helping his father, the local police chief, solve a crime; Brown outwitting town bully Bugs Meany, the leader of a gang known as the Tigers; or Brown being aided by Sally Kimball, his partner, close friend, and bodyguard. Brown, his father, or Sally invariably solves the case by exposing this inconsistency, detailed in the \"Answers\" section in the back of the book.\nFormula.\nOften, these books follow a formula where the first chapter involves Brown solving a case at the dinner table for his father, the local police chief in the fictional seaside town of Idaville in an unspecified state. When Chief Brown barely tastes his meal, that is a cue he was handed a difficult case. He pulls out his casebook and goes over it with the family. Encyclopedia solves these cases by briefly closing his eyes while he thinks deeply, then asking a single question which directly leads to him finding the solution.\nThe second mystery often begins in the Brown garage on Rover Avenue, where Encyclopedia has set up his own detective agency to help neighborhood children solve cases for \"25 cents per day, plus expenses - No case too small.\" This second case usually involves the town bully and mischief maker Bugs Meany, leader of a gang who call themselves the Tigers, who, after being foiled, will attempt revenge in the third mystery.\nIn the third mystery, the plot involves Encyclopedia's partner, close friend, and bodyguard, Sally Kimball, the one person under 14 years of age to physically stand up to Bugs. She is the only reason neither Bugs nor any of his Tigers ever try to physically attack Encyclopedia. Encyclopedia tends to dislike anyone whom Sally has a crush on, possibly indicating that he has a crush on her. Also intelligent, Sally once attempted\u2014in the first book of the series\u2014to prove herself smarter than Encyclopedia by stumping him with a mystery of her own creation. Ironically, the contest was held at the Tigers' clubhouse, with Bugs and the others cheering him on. However, she was beaten in the contest (although Encyclopedia admitted that she almost tricked him), after which she became his friend. In subsequent storylines Bugs or his gang usually set up some sort of trap to get Encyclopedia or Sally in trouble. However, as in the previous story, they make a key mistake which Encyclopedia exposes.\nLater cases may find Encyclopedia assisting his father at a crime scene (rarely more serious than larceny, and Encyclopedia is always discreet when helping his father) or interacting with people around town, often exposing scams. One such example is a high school dropout and would-be con artist named Wilford Wiggins who spends time trying to dream up schemes to fleece kids out of their money. Like Bugs, his schemes have an inconsistency which Encyclopedia exposes.\nIn some cases it is Sally and not Encyclopedia who figures it out because, as she tells Encyclopedia, \"You are a boy.\" In other words, she notices things that only a girl would find inconsistent. Sally further displays her intelligence in the various mysteries in that she often can deduce who committed the crime, or whether a certain person is lying, but she simply cannot always prove it.\nLegacy.\nThe \"Encyclopedia Brown\" books have experienced some enduring popularity.\nIn 1976, the Mystery Writers of America honored Sobol and his Encyclopedia Brown series with a special Edgar Award.\nEducators have used Encyclopedia Brown in classrooms to instruct students in skills such as writing reports. In 1986, the Society for Visual Education, Inc. published a filmstrip series with accompanying audio cassette tapes and workbooks for elementary and middle schools' use. Four Encyclopedia Brown stories were utilized: \"The Case of the Missing Statue\", \"The Case of the Happy Nephew\", \"The Case of the Kidnapped Pigs\", and \"The Case of the Marble Shooter\". According to WorldCat's library catalog listing, \"As super-sleuth Encyclopedia Brown solves four mysteries, he shows students how he fills out his reports, including selecting a topic, gathering information, taking notes, making an outline, and revising and editing.\"\nAdaptations.\nComic strip.\nFrom December 3, 1978, to September 20, 1980, \"Encyclopedia Brown\" was a daily and Sunday comic strip syndicated by Universal Press Syndicate. The artwork was done by Frank Bolle, and Donald J. Sobol was credited as the writer. When the strips were collected into books in the mid-1980s, the strip was credited to Elliot Caplin, based on Sobol's characters. The strips adapted Sobol stories, both ones that had originally been Encyclopedia Brown tales and ones that had been part of Sobol's syndicated \"Two-Minute Mysteries\" features.\nTV series.\nA live action television series adaptation, also called \"Encyclopedia Brown\", ran on HBO starting in 1989. Scott Bremner played the title role, with Laura Bridge playing Sally. The series ran for eight episodes. It was produced by Howard David Deutsch and directed by Savage Steve Holland. Parts of the series were filmed in Provo, Utah.\nThe series began with an hour-long special, \"The Case of the Missing Time Capsule\", and subsequent six episodes were 30 minutes long.\nMany of these episodes were later released on VHS.\nFilm.\nIn June 2013, Warner Bros. optioned the \"Encyclopedia Brown\" books into a feature film. Matt Johnson was in talks to write the movie. Roy Lee and Howard David Deutsch (producer of the 1989 \"Encyclopedia Brown\" TV series) and Jonathan Zakin were announced as producing.\nBooks.\nThe \"Encyclopedia Brown\" books, in order of publication (parentheses indicate numbers on original release cover art):\nSolve-It-Yourself Mystery Sweepstakes.\nFrom January 15 to June 30, 1989, a special Solve-It-Yourself Mystery Sweepstakes was held in conjunction with the Encyclopedia Brown books and Bantam Books. In the back of specially marked copies of \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Treasure Hunt\", Sobol presented an unsolved mystery for the contestant to solve and submit an answer for a chance to win a prize. The mystery for the contest was called \"The Case of the Missing Birthday Gift\", wherein Encyclopedia had to solve the case of a stolen bicycle that was given as a birthday gift to Willie Grant on his tenth birthday. The Tigers make an appearance as the suspects in the case; Bugs Meany, Jack Beck, and Rocky Graham all show up at the Tigers' clubhouse.\nContestants were allowed to enter as many times as they wished, provided they used a separate envelope for each entry. The sweepstakes was only available to US and Canada residents. No purchase was necessary, as one could either use the official form in the back of specially marked copies of \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Treasure Hunt\" or send in a 3\" by 5\" index card with the solution and the contestant's contact information.\nParodies and tributes.\nThe satirical newspaper \"The Onion\" ran an article in 2003 titled \"Idaville Detective 'Encyclopedia' Brown Found Dead In Library Dumpster\", which stated that Encyclopedia Brown, now a middle-aged police detective, had been murdered. The article parodied the books' tendency to have crimes solved through knowledge of trivia, and ended with Bugs Meany, who was now police commissioner, stating that he had an alibi for the murder in that \"I was at the North Pole watching the penguins.\" (Penguins reside almost exclusively south of the Equator, and so there are none in the northern polar regions.)\nEd Brubaker and Sean Phillips' \"Criminal: Last of the Innocent\" graphic novel features a reference to Encyclopedia Brown, with a grown-up analogue of Encyclopedia featured in the comic, as confirmed by Ed Brubaker himself.\nThe comic strip \"FoxTrot\" ran a 2000 storyline where Jason and Marcus try their hand at being private investigators, out to solve a theft perpetrated on their girlfriends. One agency name they tried was \"Encyclopedias Brown And White\" (because Marcus is African-American and Jason is Caucasian), which became the title of \"FoxTrot\"'s next book of comics.\nThe protagonist of the 2020 film \"The Kid Detective\" is a former child prodigy detective, now an unsuccessful adult, living in a small town.\nIn \"The Simpsons\" episode \"500 Keys\", the grave of Encyclopedia Brown is shown briefly next to those of Nancy Drew and the Hardy Boys, to which Lisa comments \"Jeez, they're dropping like flies\".\nIn the \"Futurama\" episode \"The Futurama Mystery Liberry\", the character is parodied as Wikipedia Brown."}
{"id": "10156", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10156", "title": "Evolved", "text": ""}
{"id": "10158", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10158", "title": "Empire", "text": " \nAn empire is a political unit made up of several territories, military outposts, and peoples, \"usually created by conquest, and divided between a dominant center and subordinate peripheries\". The center of the empire (sometimes referred to as the metropole) has political control over the peripheries. Within an empire, different populations have different sets of rights and are governed differently. Narrowly defined, an empire is a sovereign state whose head of state is an emperor or empress; but not all states with aggregate territory under the rule of supreme authorities are called empires or are ruled by an emperor; nor have all self-described empires been accepted as such by contemporaries and historians (the Central African Empire, and some Anglo-Saxon kingdoms in early England being examples).\nThere have been \"ancient and modern, centralized and decentralized, ultra-brutal and relatively benign\" empires. An important distinction has been between land empires made up solely of contiguous territories, such as the Austrian Empire or the Russian Empire; and those created by sea-power, which include territories that are remote from the 'home' country of the empire, such as the Spanish Empire or the British Empire. Aside from the more formal usage, the word \"empire\" can also refer colloquially to a large-scale business enterprise (e.g. a transnational corporation), a political organization controlled by a single individual (a political boss), or a group (political bosses). The concept of \"empire\" is associated with other such concepts as \"imperialism\", \"colonialism\", and \"globalization\", with imperialism referring to the creation and maintenance of unequal relationships between nations and not necessarily the policy of a state headed by an emperor or empress. \"Empire\" is often used as a term to describe overpowering situations causing displeasure.\nDefinition.\nAn empire is an aggregate of many separate states or territories under a supreme ruler or oligarchy. This is in contrast to a federation, which is an extensive state voluntarily composed of autonomous states and peoples. An empire is a large polity which rules over territories outside of its original borders.\nDefinitions of what physically and politically constitutes an empire vary. It might be a state affecting imperial policies or a particular political structure. Empires are typically formed from diverse ethnic, national, cultural, and religious components. 'Empire' and 'colonialism' are used to refer to relationships between a powerful state or society versus a less powerful one; Michael W. Doyle has defined empire as \"effective control, whether formal or informal, of a subordinated society by an imperial society\".\nTom Nairn and Paul James define empires as polities that \"extend relations of power across territorial spaces over which they have no prior or given legal sovereignty, and where, in one or more of the domains of economics, politics, and culture, they gain some measure of extensive hegemony over those spaces to extract or accrue value\". Rein Taagepera has defined an empire as \"any relatively large sovereign political entity whose components are not sovereign\". Peter Bang characterizes empire as \"composite, layered and anything but uniform in their internal organization of power,\" and comprising \"a range of different territories and communities, subjected hierarchically in various ways to a dominant power.\" \nThe terrestrial empire's maritime analogue is the thalassocracy, an empire composed of islands and coasts which are accessible to its terrestrial homeland, such as the Athenian-dominated Delian League.\nFurthermore, empires can expand by both land and sea. Stephen Howe notes that empires by land can be characterized by expansion over terrain, \"extending directly outwards from the original frontier\" while an empire by sea can be characterized by colonial expansion and empire building \"by an increasingly powerful navy\".\nHowever, sometimes an empire is only a semantic construction, such as when a ruler assumes the title of \"emperor\". That polity over which the ruler reigns logically becomes an \"empire\", despite having no additional territory or hegemony. Examples of this form of empire are the Central African Empire, Mexican Empire, or the Korean Empire proclaimed in 1897 when Korea, far from gaining new territory, was on the verge of being annexed by the Empire of Japan, one of the last to use the name officially. Among the last states in the 20th century known as empires in this sense were the Central African Empire, Ethiopia, Vietnam, Manchukuo, Russia, Germany, and Korea.\nScholars typically distinguish empires from nation-states. In an empire, there is a hierarchy whereby one group of people (usually, the metropole) has command over other groups of people, and there is a hierarchy of rights and prestige for different groups of people. Josep Colomer distinguished between empires and states in the following way:\nCharacteristics.\nMany empires were the result of military conquest, incorporating the vanquished states into a political union, but imperial hegemony can be established in other ways. The Athenian Empire, the Roman Empire, and the British Empire developed at least in part under elective auspices. The Empire of Brazil declared itself an empire after separating from the Portuguese Empire in 1822. France has twice transitioned from being called the French Republic to being called the French Empire while it retained an overseas empire. \nEuropeans began applying the designation of \"empire\" to non-European monarchies, such as the Qing Empire and the Mughal Empire, as well as the Maratha Confederacy, eventually leading to the looser denotations applicable to any political structure meeting their criteria of \"imperium\". Some monarchies styled themselves as having greater size, scope, and power than the territorial, politico-military, and economic facts support. As a consequence, some monarchs assumed the title of \"emperor\" (or its corresponding translation, \"tsar\", \"empereur\", \"kaiser\", \"shah\" etc.) and renamed their states as \"The Empire of ...\". Empires were seen as an expanding power, administration, ideas and beliefs followed by cultural habits from place to place. Some empires tended to impose their culture on the subject states to strengthen the imperial structure; others opted for multicultural and cosmopolitan policies. Cultures generated by empires could have notable effects that outlasted the empire itself. Most histories of empires have been hostile, especially if the authors were promoting nationalism. Stephen Howe, although himself hostile, listed positive qualities: the guaranteed stability, security, and legal order for their subjects. They tried to minimize ethnic and religious antagonism inside the empire. The aristocracies that ruled them were often more cosmopolitan and broad-minded than their nationalistic successors.\nThere are two main ways to establish and maintain an imperial political structure: (i) as a territorial empire of direct conquest and control with force or (ii) as a coercive, hegemonic empire of indirect conquest and control with power. The former method provides greater tribute and direct political control, yet limits further expansion because it absorbs military forces to fixed garrisons. The latter method provides less tribute and indirect control, but avails military forces for further expansion. Territorial empires (e.g. the Macedonian Empire and Byzantine Empire) tend to be contiguous areas. The term, on occasion, has been applied to maritime republics or thalassocracies (e.g. the Athenian and British empires) with looser structures and more scattered territories, often consisting of many islands and other forms of possessions which required the creation and maintenance of a powerful navy. Empires such as the Holy Roman Empire also came together by electing the emperor with votes from member realms through the Imperial election.\nHistory of imperialism.\nEarly empires.\nStephen Howe writes that with the exception of the Roman, Chinese and \"perhaps ancient Egyptian states\", early empires seldom survived the death of their founder and were usually limited in scope to conquest and collection of tribute, having little impact on the everyday lives of their subjects.\nWith the exception of Rome, the periods of dissolution following imperial falls were equally short. Successor states seldom outlived their founders and disappeared in the next and often larger empire. Some empires, like the Neo-Babylonian, Median and Lydian were outright conquered by a larger empire. The historical pattern was not a simple rise-and-fall cycle; rather it was rise, fall, and greater rise, or as Raoul Naroll put it, \"expanding pulsation.\"\nEmpires were limited in scope to conquest, as Howe observed, but conquest is a considerable scope. Many fought to the death to avoid it or to be liberated from it. Imperial conquests and attempts of conquest significantly contributed to the list of wars by death toll. The imperial impact on subjects can be regarded as \"little,\" but only on those subjects who survived the imperial conquest and rule. We cannot ask the inhabitants of Carthage and Masada, for example, whether empire had little impact on their lives. We seldom hear the voices of subject peoples because history is mostly written by winners. The imperial sources tend to ignore or reduce the resistance by subdued states. But one rich primary source of the subject population is the Hebrew Prophetic books. The hatred towards the ruling empires expressed in this source makes impression of an impact more serious than estimated by Howe. A classical writer and adherent of empire, Orosius explicitly preferred to avoid the views of subject populations. And another classical Roman patriot, Lucan confessed that \"words cannot express how bitterly we are hated\" by subject peoples.\nThe earliest known empire appeared in southern Egypt sometime around 3200 BC. Southern Egypt was divided by three kingdoms each centered on a powerful city. Hierapolis conquered the other two cities over two centuries, and later grew into the country of Egypt. The Akkadian Empire, established by Sargon of Akkad (24th century BC), was an early all-Mesopotamian empire which spread into Anatolia, the Levant and Ancient Iran. This imperial achievement was repeated by Shamshi-Adad I of Assyria and Hammurabi of Babylon in the 19th and 18th centuries BC. In the 15th century BC, the New Kingdom of Ancient Egypt, ruled by Thutmose III, was ancient Africa's major force upon incorporating Nubia and the ancient city-states of the Levant.\n in China rose the Shang Empire which was succeeded by the Zhou Empire . Both equalled or surpassed in territory their contemporary Near Eastern empires such as the Middle Assyrian Empire, Hittite Empire, Egyptian Empire and those of the Mitanni and Elamites. The Zhou Empire dissolved in 770 BC into feudal multi-state system which lasted for five and a half centuries until the universal conquest of Qin in 221 BC. The first empire comparable to Rome in organization was the Neo-Assyrian Empire (916\u2013612 BC). The Median Empire was the first empire within the territory of Persia. By the 6th century BC, after having allied with the Babylonians, Scythians and Cimmerians to defeat the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the Medes were able to establish their own empire, which was the largest of its day and lasted for about sixty years.\nClassical period.\nThe Axial Age (mid-First Millennium BC) witnessed unprecedented imperial expansion in the Indo-Mediterranean region and China. The successful and extensive Achaemenid Empire (550\u2013330 BC), also known as the first Persian Empire, covered Mesopotamia, Egypt, parts of Greece, Thrace, the Middle East, much of Central Asia, and North-Western India. It is considered the first great empire in history or the first \"world empire\". It was overthrown and replaced by the short-lived empire of Alexander the Great. His Empire was succeeded by three Empires ruled by the Diadochi\u2014the Seleucid, Ptolemaic, and Macedonian, which, despite being independent, are called the \"Hellenistic Empire\" by virtue of their similarities in culture and administration.\nMeanwhile, in the western Mediterranean the Empires of Carthage and Rome began their rise. Having decisively defeated Carthage in 202 BC, Rome defeated Macedonia in 200 BC and the Seleucids in 190\u2013189 BC to establish an all-Mediterranean Empire. The Seleucid Empire broke apart and its former eastern part was absorbed by the Parthian Empire. In 30 BC Rome annexed Ptolemaic Egypt.\nIn India during the Axial Age appeared the Maurya Empire\u2014a geographically extensive and powerful empire, ruled by the Mauryan dynasty from 321 to 185 BC. The empire was founded in 322 BC by Chandragupta Maurya through the help of Chanakya, who rapidly expanded his power westward across central and western India, taking advantage of the disruptions of local powers following the withdrawal by Alexander the Great. By 320 BC, the Maurya Empire had fully occupied northwestern India as well as defeating and conquering the satraps left by Alexander. Under Emperor Ashoka the Great, the Maurya Empire became the first Indian empire to conquer the whole Indian Peninsula \u2014 an achievement repeated only twice, by the Gupta and Mughal Empires. In the reign of Ashoka Buddhism spread to become the dominant religion in many parts of the ancient India.\nIn 221 BC, China became an empire when the State of Qin ended the chaotic Warring States period through its conquest of the other six states, starting the Qin Empire (221\u2013207 BC). Its sovereign adopted the new title of \"Huangdi\" (\u7687\u5e1d), which is translated in English as \"Emperor\". The Qin Empire is known for the construction of the Great Wall of China and the Terracotta Army, as well as the standardization of currency, weights, measures and writing system. It laid the foundation for China's first golden age, the Han dynasty (202 BC\u2013AD 9, AD 25\u2013220). The Han Empire expanded into Central Asia and established trade through the Silk Road. Confucianism was, for the first time, adopted as an official state ideology. During the reign of the Emperor Wu of Han, the Xiongnu were pacified. By this time, only four empires stretched between the Pacific and the Atlantic: the Han Empire of China, the Kushan Empire, the Parthian Empire of Persia, and the Roman Empire. The collapse of the Han Empire in AD 220 saw China fragmented into the Three Kingdoms, only to be unified once again by the Jin Empire (AD 266\u2013420). The relative weakness of the Jin Empire plunged China into political disunity that would last from AD 304 to AD 589 when the Sui Empire (AD 581\u2013618) reunited China.\nThe Romans were the first people to invent and embody the concept of \"empire\" in their two mandates: to wage war and to make and execute laws. They were the most extensive Western empire until the early modern period, and left a lasting impact on European society. Many languages, cultural values, religious institutions, political divisions, urban centers, and legal systems can trace their origins to the Roman Empire. The Roman Empire governed and rested on exploitative actions. They took slaves and money from the peripheries to support the imperial center. However, the absolute reliance on conquered peoples to carry out the empire's fortune, sustain wealth, and fight wars would ultimately lead to the collapse of the Roman Empire. The Romans were strong believers in what they called their \"civilizing mission\". This term was legitimized and justified by writers like Cicero who wrote that only under Roman rule could the world flourish and prosper. This ideology, that was envisioned to bring a new world order, was eventually spread across the Mediterranean world and beyond. People started to build houses like Romans, eat the same food, wear the same clothes and engage in the same games. Even rights of citizenship and authority to rule were granted to people not born within Roman territory.\nThe Latin word \"imperium\" derives from \"imperare\", meaning \"to command\", and originally referred to a magistrate's authority (usually in a military sense). As the Roman state expanded overseas, the term began to be used to describe Rome's authority over its colonies and client states. Successful generals were often given the title \"imperator\", an honorific roughly meaning \"commander\". Although historians use the terms \"Republic\" and \"Empire\" to identify the periods of Roman history before and after absolute power was assumed by Augustus, the Romans themselves continued to refer to their government as the \"Res publica\", meaning \"public affair\". On the other hand, the concept of \"imperium Romanum\", as in, the authority of the Romans, is attested since the 2nd century BC. The modern concepts of \"Empire\" and \"Emperor\" did not appear until several centuries later, long after the fall of Rome in the West. Augustus established a new \"de facto\" monarchy, but sought to maintain the appearance of a republican government. He and his early successors used the informal titles of \"augustus\" and \"princeps\", but over time the title of \"imperator\" came to denote the office of (what is now referred to as) \"emperor\".\nThe legal systems of France and its former colonies are strongly influenced by Roman law. Similarly, the United States was founded on a model inspired by the Roman Republic, with upper and lower legislative assemblies, and executive power vested in a single individual, the president. The president, as \"commander-in-chief\" of the armed forces, reflects the ancient Roman titles \"imperator princeps\". The Roman Catholic Church, founded in the early Imperial Period, spread across Europe, first by the activities of Christian evangelists, and later by official imperial promulgation.\nPost-classical period.\nIn Western Asia, the term \"Persian Empire\" came to denote the Iranian imperial states established at different historical periods of pre\u2013Islamic and post\u2013Islamic Persia.\nIn East Asia, various Chinese empires (or dynasties) dominated the political, economic and cultural landscapes during this era, the most powerful of which was probably the Tang Empire (618\u2013690, 705\u2013907). Other influential Chinese empires during the post-classical period include the Sui Empire (581\u2013618), the Great Liao Empire, the Song Empire, the Western Xia Empire (1038\u20131227), the Great Jin Empire (1115\u20131234), the Western Liao Empire (1124\u20131218), the Great Yuan Empire (1271\u20131368), and the Great Ming Empire (1368\u20131644). During this period, Japan and Korea underwent voluntary Sinicization. The Sui, Tang and Song empires had the world's largest economy and were the most technologically advanced during their time; the Great Yuan Empire was the world's ninth largest empire by total land area; while the Great Ming Empire is famous for the seven maritime expeditions led by Zheng He.\nThe Ajuran Sultanate was a Somali empire in the medieval times that dominated the Indian Ocean trade. It was a Somali Muslim sultanate that ruled over large parts of the Horn of Africa in the Middle Ages. Through a strong centralized administration and an aggressive military stance towards invaders, the Ajuran Sultanate successfully resisted an Oromo invasion from the west and a Portuguese incursion from the east during the Gaal Madow and the Ajuran-Portuguese wars. Trading routes dating from the ancient and early medieval periods of Somali maritime enterprise were strengthened or re-established, and foreign trade and commerce in the coastal provinces flourished with ships sailing to and coming from many kingdoms and empires in East Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia, Europe, Middle East, North Africa and East Africa.\nIn the 7th century, Maritime Southeast Asia witnessed the rise of a Buddhist thallasocracy, the Srivijaya Empire, which thrived for 600 years and was succeeded by the Hindu-Buddhist Majapahit Empire that ruled from the 13th to 15th centuries. In the Southeast Asian mainland, the Hindu-Buddhist Khmer Empire was centered in the city of Angkor and flourished from the 9th to 13th centuries. Following the demise of the Khmer Empire, the Siamese Empire flourished alongside the Burmese and Lan Chang Empires from the 13th through the 18th centuries.\nIn Southeastern and Eastern Europe, during 917, the Eastern Roman Empire, sometimes called the Byzantine Empire, was forced to recognize the Imperial title of Bulgarian ruler Simeon the Great, who were then called Tsar, the first ruler to hold that precise imperial title. The Bulgarian Empire, established in the region in 680\u2013681, remained a major power in Southeast Europe until its fall in the late 14th century. Bulgaria gradually reached its cultural and territorial apogee in the 9th century and early 10th century under Prince Boris I and Simeon I, when its early Christianization in 864 allowed it to develop into the cultural and literary center of Slavic Europe, as well as one of the largest states in Europe, thus the period is considered the Golden Age of medieval Bulgarian culture. Major events included the development of the Cyrillic script at the Preslav Literary School, declared official in 893, and the establishment of the liturgy in Old Church Slavonic, also called Old Bulgarian.\nAt the time, in the Medieval West, the title \"empire\" had a specific technical meaning that was exclusively applied to states that considered themselves the heirs and successors of the Roman Empire. Among these were the \"Byzantine Empire\", which was the actual continuation of the Eastern portion of the Roman Empire, the Carolingian Empire, the largely Germanic Holy Roman Empire, and the Russian Empire. Yet, these states did not always fit the geographic, political, or military profiles of empires in the modern sense of the word. To legitimise their \"imperium\", these states directly claimed the title of \"Empire\" from Rome. The \"sacrum Romanum imperium\" (Holy Roman Empire), which lasted from 800 to 1806, claimed to have exclusively comprehended Christian principalities, and was only nominally a discrete imperial state. The Holy Roman Empire was not always centrally-governed, as it had neither core nor peripheral territories, and was not governed by a central, politico-military elite. Hence, Voltaire's remark that the Holy Roman Empire \"was neither holy, nor Roman, nor an empire\" is accurate to the degree that it ignores German rule over Italian, French, Proven\u00e7al, Polish, Flemish, Dutch, and Bohemian populations, and the efforts of the ninth-century Holy Roman Emperors (i.e., the Ottonians) to establish central control. Voltaire's \"nor an empire\" observation applies to its late period.\nIn 1204, after the Fourth Crusade conquered Constantinople, the crusaders established a Latin Empire (1204\u20131261) in that city, while the defeated Byzantine Empire's descendants established two smaller, short-lived empires in Asia Minor: the Empire of Nicaea (1204\u20131261) and the Empire of Trebizond (1204\u20131461).\nConstantinople was retaken in 1261 by the Byzantine successor state centered in Nicaea, re-establishing the Byzantine Empire until 1453, by which time the Turkish-Muslim Ottoman Empire (ca. 1300\u20131918), had conquered most of the region. The Ottoman Empire was a successor of the Abbasid Empire and it was the most powerful empire to succeed the Abbasi empires at the time, as well as one of the most powerful empires in the world. They became the successors after the Abbasid Empire fell from the Mongols (H\u00fcleg\u00fc Khan). The Ottoman Empire centered on modern day Turkey, dominated the eastern Mediterranean, overthrew the Byzantine Empire to claim Constantinople and it would start battering at Austria and Malta, which were countries that were key to central and to south-west Europe respectively \u2014 mainly for their geographical location.\nThe reason these occurrences of batterings were so important was because the Ottomans were Muslim, and the rest of Europe was Christian, so there was a sense of religious fighting going on. This was not just a rivalry of East and West but a rivalry between Christians and Muslims. Both the Christians and Muslims had alliances with other countries, and they had problems in them as well. The flows of trade and of cultural influences across the supposed great divide never ceased, so the countries never stopped bartering with each other. These epochal clashes between civilizations profoundly shaped many people's thinking back then, and continues to do so in the present day. Modern hatred against Muslim communities in South-Eastern Europe, mainly in Bosnia and Kosovo, has often been articulated in terms of seeing them as unwelcome residues of this imperialism: in short, as Turks. Moreover, Eastern Orthodox imperialism was not re-established until the coronation of Ivan the Terrible as Emperor of Russia in 1547. Likewise, with the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 during the Napoleonic Wars (1803\u20131815), the Austrian Empire (1804\u20131867) emerged reconstituted as the Empire of Austria-Hungary (1867\u20131918), having \"inherited\" the imperium of Central and Western Europe from the losers of said wars.\nIn the thirteenth century, Genghis Khan expanded the Mongol Empire to be the largest contiguous empire in the world. However, within two generations, the empire was separated into four discrete khanates under Genghis Khan's grandsons. One of them, Kublai Khan, conquered China and established the Yuan dynasty with the imperial capital at Beijing. One family ruled the whole Eurasian land mass from the Pacific to the Adriatic and Baltic Seas. The emergence of the Pax Mongolica had significantly eased trade and commerce across Asia. The Safavid Empire of Iran was also founded.\nEarly Modern period.\nThe Islamic gunpowder empires started to develop from the 15th century. In the Indian subcontinent, the Delhi Sultanate conquered most of the Indian peninsula and spread Islam across it. It later disintegrated with the establishment of the Bengal, Gujarat, and Bahmani Sultanate. In the 16th century, the Mughal Empire was founded by Timur and Genghis Khan's direct descendant Babur. His successors such Humayun, Akbar, Jahangir and Shah Jahan extended the empire. In the 17th century, Aurangzeb expanded the Mughal Empire, controlling most of the South Asia through Sharia, which became the world's largest economy and leading manufacturing power with a nominal GDP that valued a quarter of world GDP, superior than the combination of Europe's GDP. It has been estimated that the Mughal emperors controlled an unprecedented one-fourth of the world's entire economy and was home to one-fourth of the world's population at the time. After the death of Aurangzeb, which marks the end of the medieval India and the beginning of European invasion in India, the empire was weakened by Nader Shah's invasion.\nThe Mysore Empire was soon established by Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan, who allied with Napoleon Bonaparte. Other independent empires were also established, such as those ruled by the Nawabs of Bengal and Nizam of Hyderabad.\nIn the pre-Columbian Americas, two Empires were prominent\u2014the Azteca in Mesoamerica and Inca in Peru. Both existed for several generations before the arrival of the Europeans. Inca had gradually conquered the whole of the settled Andean world as far south as today Santiago in Chile.\nIn Oceania, the Tonga Empire was a lonely empire that existed from the Late Middle Ages to the Modern period.\nColonial empires.\nIn the 15th century, Castile (Spain) landing in the so-called \"New World\" (first, the Americas, and later Australia), along with Portuguese travels around the Cape of Good Hope and along the coast of Africa bordering the southeast Indian Ocean, proved ripe opportunities for the continent's Renaissance-era monarchies to establish colonial empires like those of the ancient Romans and Greeks. In the Old World, colonial imperialism was attempted and established on the Canary Islands and Ireland. These conquered lands and people became \"de jure\" subordinates of the empire, rather than \"de facto\" imperial territories and subjects. Such subjugation often elicited \"client-state\" resentment that the empire unwisely ignored, leading to the collapse of the European colonial imperial system in the late 19th through the mid-20th century. Portuguese discovery of Newfoundland in the New World gave way to many expeditions led by England (later Britain), Spain, France, and the Dutch Republic. In the 18th century, the Spanish Empire was at its height because of the great mass of goods taken from conquered territory in the Americas (nowadays Mexico, parts of the United States, the Caribbean, most of Central America, and South America) and the Philippines.\nModern period.\nThe British established their first empire (1583\u20131783) in North America by colonising lands that made up British America, including parts of Canada, the Caribbean and the Thirteen Colonies. In 1776, the Continental Congress of the Thirteen Colonies declared itself independent from the British Empire, thus beginning the American Revolution. Britain turned towards Asia, the Pacific, and later Africa, with subsequent exploration and conquests leading to the rise of the Second British Empire (1783\u20131815), which was followed by the Industrial Revolution and Britain's Imperial Century (1815\u20131914). It became the largest empire in world history, encompassing one quarter of the world's land area and one fifth of its population. The impacts of this period are still prominent in the current age \"including widespread use of the English language, belief in Protestant religion, economic globalization, modern precepts of law and order, and representative democracy.\"\nThe Great Qing Empire of China (1644\u20131912) was the fourth largest empire in world history by total land area, and laid the foundation for the modern territorial claims of both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China. Apart from having direct control over much of East Asia, the empire also exerted domination over other states through the Chinese tributary system. The multiethnic and multicultural nature of the Great Qing Empire was crucial to the subsequent birth of the nationalistic concept of \"zhonghua minzu\". The empire reached its peak during the reign of the Qianlong Emperor, after which the empire entered a period of prolonged decline, culminating in its collapse as a result of the Xinhai Revolution.\nThe Ashanti Empire (or Confederacy), also Asanteman (1701\u20131896), was a West African state of the Ashanti, the Akan people of the Ashanti Region, Akanland in modern-day Ghana. The Ashanti (or Asante) were a powerful, militaristic and highly disciplined people in West Africa. Their military power, which came from effective strategy and an early adoption of European firearms, created an empire that stretched from central Akanland (in modern-day Ghana) to present day Benin and Ivory Coast, bordered by the Dagomba kingdom to the north and Dahomey to the east. Due to the empire's military prowess, sophisticated hierarchy, social stratification and culture, the Ashanti empire had one of the largest historiographies of any indigenous Sub-Saharan African political entity.\nThe Sikh Empire (1799\u20131849) was established in the Punjab region of India. The empire weakened when its founder, Ranjit Singh, died in 1839, the empire fell to the British after the Second Anglo-Sikh War in 1849. During the same period, the Maratha Empire (also known as the Maratha Confederacy) was a Hindu state located in present-day India. It existed from 1674 to 1818, and at its peak, the empire's territories covered much of Southern Asia. The empire was founded and consolidated by Shivaji. After the death of Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb, it expanded greatly under the rule of the Peshwas. In 1761, the Maratha army lost the Third Battle of Panipat, which halted the expansion of the empire. Later, the empire was divided into a confederacy of states which, in 1818, were lost to the British during the Anglo-Maratha wars.\nFrance was a dominant empire possessing many colonies in various locations around the world. During Louis XIV's long reign, from 1643 to 1715, France was the leading European power as Europe's most populous, richest and powerful country. The Empire of the French (1804\u20131814), also known as the Greater French Empire or First French Empire but more commonly known as the Napoleonic Empire, was also the dominant power of much of continental Europe. It ruled over 90 million people and was the sole power in Europe if not the world; Britain was the only main rival during the early 19th century. From the 16th to the 17th centuries, the First French colonial empire\u2019s total area at its peak in 1680 was over , the second largest empire in the world at the time behind only the Spanish Empire. It had many possessions around the world, mainly in the Americas, Asia and Africa. At its peak in 1750, French India had an area of 1.5 million km2 and a total population of 100 million people and was the most populous colony under French rule. In the 19th and 20th centuries, the colonial empire of France was the second largest in the world behind the British Empire. The French colonial empire extended over of land at its height in the 1920s and 1930s with a totaled population of 150 million people. Including metropolitan France, the total amount of land under French sovereignty reached at the time, which is 10.0% of the Earth's total land area. The total area of the French colonial empire, with the first (mainly in the Americas and Asia) and second (mainly in Africa and Asia), the French colonial empires combined, reached , the second largest in the world (the first being the British Empire).\nThe Empire of Brazil (1822\u20131889) was the only South American modern monarchy, established by the heir of the Portuguese Empire as an independent nation eventually became an emerging international power. The new country was huge but sparsely populated and ethnically diverse. In 1889 the monarchy was overthrown in a sudden coup d'\u00e9tat led by a clique of military leaders whose goal was the formation of a republic.\nThe German Empire (1871\u20131918), another \"heir to the Holy Roman Empire\", arose in 1871.\nFall of empires.\nRoman Empire.\nThe fall of the western half of the Roman Empire is seen as one of the most pivotal points in all of human history. This event traditionally marks the transition from classical civilization to the birth of Europe. The Roman Empire started to decline at the end of the reign of the last of the Five Good Emperors, Marcus Aurelius in 161\u2013180 A.D. There is still a debate over the cause of the fall of one of the largest empires in history. Piganiol argues that the Roman Empire under its authority can be described as \"a period of terror\", holding its imperial system accountable for its failure. Another theory blames the rise of Christianity as the cause, arguing that the spread of certain Christian ideals caused internal weakness of the military and state. In his book \"The Fall of the Roman Empire\", Peter Heather contends that there are many factors, including issues of money and manpower, which produce military limitations and culminate in the Roman army's inability to effectively repel invading barbarians at the frontier. The Western Roman economy was already stretched to its limit in the 4th and 5th centuries C.E. due to continual conflict and loss of territory which, in turn, generated loss of revenue from the tax base. There was also the looming presence of the Persians which, at any time, took a large percentage of the fighting force's attention. At the same time the Huns, a nomadic warrior people from the steppes of Asia, are also putting extreme pressure on the German tribes outside of the Roman frontier, which gave the German tribes no other choice, geographically, but to move into Roman territory. At this point, without increased funding, the Roman army could no longer effectively defend its borders against major waves of Germanic tribes. This inability is illustrated by the crushing defeat at Adrianople in 378 C.E. and, later, the Crossing of the Rhine in 406 C.E.\nTransition from empire.\nIn time, an empire may change from one political entity to another. For example, the Holy Roman Empire, a German re-constitution of the Roman Empire, metamorphosed into various political structures (i.e., federalism), and eventually, under Habsburg rule, re-constituted itself in 1804 as the Austrian Empire, an empire of much different politics and scope, which in turn became the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1867. The Roman Empire, perennially reborn, also lived on as the Byzantine Empire (Eastern Roman Empire) \u2013 temporarily splitting into the Latin Empire, the Empire of Nicaea and the Empire of Trebizond before its remaining territory and centre became part of the Ottoman Empire. A similarly persistent concept of empire saw the Mongol Empire become the Khanate of the Golden Horde, the Yuan Empire of China, and the Ilkhanate before resurrection as the Timurid Empire and as the Mughal Empire. After 1945 the Empire of Japan retained its Emperor but lost its colonial possessions and became the State of Japan. Despite the semantic reference to imperial power, Japan is a \"de jure\" constitutional monarchy, with a homogeneous population of 127 million people that is 98.5 percent ethnic Japanese, making it one of the largest nation-states.\nAn autocratic empire can become a republic (e.g., the Central African Empire in 1979), or it can become a republic with its imperial dominions reduced to a core territory (e.g., Weimar Germany shorn of the German colonial empire (1918\u20131919), or the Ottoman Empire (1918\u20131923)). The dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire after 1918 provides an example of a multi-ethnic superstate broken into constituent nation-oriented states: the republics, kingdoms, and provinces of Austria, Hungary, Transylvania, Croatia, Slovenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Czechoslovakia, Ruthenia, Galicia, \"et al\". In the aftermath of World War I the Russian Empire also broke up and became reduced to the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) before re-forming as the USSR (1922\u20131991) \u2013 sometimes seen as the core of a Soviet Empire. The latter also disintegrated in 1989\u201391.\nAfter the Second World War (1939\u20131945), the deconstruction of colonial empires quickened and became commonly known as decolonisation. The British Empire evolved into a loose, multinational Commonwealth of Nations, while the French colonial empire metamorphosed to a Francophone commonwealth. The same process happened to the Portuguese Empire, which evolved into a Lusophone commonwealth, and to the former territories of the extinct Spanish Empire, which alongside the Lusophone countries of Portugal and Brazil, created an Ibero-American commonwealth. France returned the French territory of Kwang-Chou-Wan to China in 1946. The British gave Hong Kong back to China in 1997 after 150 years of rule. The Portuguese territory of Macau reverted to China in 1999. Macau and Hong Kong did not become part of the provincial structure of China; they have autonomous systems of government as Special Administrative Regions of the People's Republic of China.\nFrance still governs overseas territories (French Guiana, Martinique, R\u00e9union, French Polynesia, New Caledonia, Saint Martin, Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon, Guadeloupe, French Southern and Antarctic Lands (TAAF), Wallis and Futuna, Saint Barth\u00e9lemy, and Mayotte), and exerts hegemony in Francafrique (\"French Africa\"; 29 francophone countries such as Chad, Rwanda, etc.). Fourteen British Overseas Territories remain under British sovereignty. Fifteen countries of the Commonwealth of Nations share their head of state, King Charles III, as Commonwealth realms.\nContemporary usage.\nUnited States of America.\nContemporaneously, the concept of \"empire\" is politically valid, yet is not always used in the traditional sense. One of widely discussed cases is the United States. Characterizing aspects of the US in regards to its territorial expansion, foreign policy, and its international behavior as \"American Empire\" is common. The term \"American Empire\" refers to the United States' cultural ideologies and foreign policy strategies. The term is most commonly used to describe the U.S.'s status since the 20th century, but it can also be applied to the United States' world standing before the rise of nationalism in the 20th century. The US itself was at one point a colony in the British Empire. Thomas Jefferson used the term \"Empire of Liberty\" and argued that \"no constitution was ever before so well calculated as ours for extensive empire &amp; self government\". Jefferson in the 1780s while awaiting the fall of the Spanish empire, said: \"till our population can be sufficiently advanced to gain it from them piece by piece\".\nEven so, the ideology that the US was founded on anti-imperialist principles has prevented many from acknowledging America's status as an empire. This active rejection of imperialist status is not limited to high-ranking government officials, as it has been ingrained in American society throughout its entire history. As David Ludden explains, \"journalists, scholars, teachers, students, analysts, and politicians prefer to depict the U.S. as a nation pursuing its own interests and ideals\". This often results in imperialist endeavors being presented as measures taken to enhance state security. Ludden explains this phenomenon with the concept of \"ideological blinders\", which he says prevent American citizens from realizing the true nature of America's current systems and strategies. These \"ideological blinders\" that people wear have resulted in an \"invisible\" American empire of which most American citizens are unaware. Besides its anti-imperialist principles, the United States is not traditionally recognized as an empire, because the U.S. adopted a different political system from those that previous empires had used.\nDespite the anti-imperial ideology and systematic differences, the political objectives and strategies of the United States government have been quite similar to those of previous empires. Throughout the 19th century, the United States government attempted to expand its territory by any means necessary. Regardless of the supposed motivation for this constant expansion, all of these land acquisitions were carried out by imperialistic means. This was done by financial means in some cases, and by military force in others. Most notably, the Louisiana Purchase (1803), the Texas Annexation (1845), and the Mexican Cession (1848) highlight the imperialistic goals of the United States during this \"modern period\" of imperialism. The U.S. government has stopped adding additional territories, where they permanently and politically take over since the early 20th century, and instead have established 800 military bases as their outposts. With this overt but subtle military control of other countries, scholars consider U.S. foreign policy strategies to be imperialistic. Academic Krishna Kumar argues that the distinct principles of nationalism and imperialism may result in common practice; that is, the pursuit of nationalism can often coincide with the pursuit of imperialism in terms of strategy and decision making. Stuart Creighton Miller posits that the public's sense of innocence about Realpolitik (politics based on practical considerations, rather than ideals) impacts popular recognition of US imperial conduct since it governed other countries via surrogates. These surrogates were domestically weak, right-wing governments that would collapse without US support.\nFormer President G. W. Bush's Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld, said: \"We don't seek empires. We're not imperialistic; we never have been.\" This was said in the context of the international opposition to the Iraq War led by the United States in manner widely regarded as imperial. With the 2003 invasion of Iraq underway, historian Sidney Lens argued that, from its inception, the US has used every means available to dominate foreign peoples and states. The same time, Eliot A. Cohen suggested: \"The Age of Empire may indeed have ended, but then an age of American hegemony has begun, regardless of what one calls it.\" Some scholars did not bother how to call it: \"When it walks like a duck, talks like a duck, it's a duck.\"\nEuropean Union.\nSince the European Union was formed as a polity in 1993, it has established its own currency, its own citizenship, established discrete military forces, and exercises its limited hegemony in the Mediterranean, eastern parts of Europe, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Asia. The big size and high development index of the EU economy often has the ability to influence global trade regulations in its favor. The political scientist Jan Zielonka suggests that this behavior is imperial because it coerces its neighbouring countries into adopting its \"European\" economic, legal, and political structures. Tony Benn, a left-wing Labour Party MP of the United Kingdom, opposed the European integration policies of the European Union by saying, \"I think they're (the European Union) building an empire there, they want us (the United Kingdom) to be a part of their empire and I don't want that.\"\nRussia.\nIn the aftermath of the annexation of Crimea, political scientist Agnia Grigas argued that Moscow pursues the policy of \"reimperialization.\" Two days after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, historian specializing on empires, Niall Ferguson, interpreted the policy of Putin as an attempt to bring back the tsarist Russian Empire. By this time, the \"neo-imperialism,\" or \"neo-imperial ambitions\" of Russia became widely claimed. When Vladimir Putin denies the reality of the Ukrainian state, says another historian of empires Timothy Snyder, he is speaking the familiar language of empire. For five hundred years, European conquerors saw themselves as actors with purpose, and the colonized as instruments to realize the imperial vision.\nVladimir Putin himself used to state: \"For Russia to survive, it must remain an empire.\" In June 2022, on the 350 anniversary of the birth of the 18th-century Russian tsar Peter the Great, Putin has compared himself to him associating their twin historic quests to win back Russian lands. For critics this association implied that Putin's \"complaints about historical injustice, eastward NATO expansion, and other grievances with the west were all a fa\u00e7ade for a traditional war of conquest\" and imperialism. \"After months of denials that Russia is driven by imperial ambitions in Ukraine, Putin appeared to embrace that mission.\" On the same occasion, Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to the Ukrainian government, suggested Russia's \"de-imperialization,\" instead of Russia's official war aim of \"de-Nazification\" of Ukraine.\nLater that year, Anne Applebaum approached the new Russian Empire as a fact and opined that this Empire must be defeated. Other pundits described the new Russian Empire as a failed attempt because Russia failed to annex the whole of Ukraine.\nTimeline of empires.\nThe chart below shows a timeline of polities that have been called empires. Dynastic changes are marked with a white line.\nTheoretical research.\nEmpire versus nation state.\nEmpires have been the dominant international organization in world history:\nSimilarly, Anthony Pagden, Eliot A. Cohen, Jane Burbank and Frederick Cooper estimate that \"empires have always been more frequent, more extensive political and social forms than tribal territories or nations have ever been.\" Many empires endured for centuries, while the age of the ancient Egyptian, Chinese and Japanese Empires is counted in millennia. \"Most people throughout history have lived under imperial rule.\"\nPolitical scientist Hedley Bull wrote that \"in the broad sweep of human history ... the form of states system has been the exception rather than the rule\". His colleague Robert Gilpin confirmed this conclusion for the pre-modern period:\nHistorian Michael Doyle who undertook an extensive research on empires extended the observation into the modern era:\nThe author of \"\", Hans Kohn, acknowledged that it was the opposite idea\u2014of imperialism\u2014that was, perhaps, the most influential single idea for two millennia, the ordering of human society through unified dominion and common civilization. Yet a century ago, most of the world was ruled by persons who proudly proclaimed themselves Emperors and were proud of their Empires. Of the great powers, only the United States and France were republics.\nUniversal empire.\nExpert on warfare Quincy Wright generalized on what he called \"universal empire\"\u2014empire unifying all the contemporary system:\nGerman Sociologist Friedrich Tenbruck finds that the macro-historic process of imperial expansion gave rise to global history in which the formations of universal empires were most significant stages. A later group of political scientists, working on the phenomenon of the current unipolarity, in 2007 edited research on several pre-modern civilizations by experts in respective fields. The overall conclusion was that the balance of power was inherently unstable order and usually soon broke in favor of imperial order. Yet before the advent of the unipolarity, world historian Arnold Toynbee and political scientist Martin Wight had drawn the same conclusion with an unambiguous implication for the modern world:\nThe earliest thinker to approach the phenomenon of universal empire from a theoretical point of view was Polybius (2:3):\nJohann Gottlieb Fichte, having witnessed the battle at Jena in 1806 when Napoleon overwhelmed Prussia, described what he perceived as a deep historical trend:\nFichte's later compatriot, Geographer Alexander von Humboldt, in the mid-Nineteenth century observed a macro-historic trend of imperial growth in both Hemispheres: \"Men of great and strong minds, as well as whole nations, acted under influence of one idea, the purity of which was utterly unknown to them.\"\nThe imperial expansion filled the world . Two famous contemporary observers\u2014Frederick Turner and Halford Mackinder described the event and drew implications, the former predicting American overseas expansion and the latter stressing that the world empire is now in sight.\nIn 1870, Argentine diplomat, jurist and political theorist Juan Bautista Alberdi described imperial consolidation. As von Humboldt, he found this trend unplanned and irrational but evident beyond doubt in the \"unwritten history of events.\" He linked this trend to the recent Evolution theory: Nations gravitate towards the formation of a single universal society. The laws that lead the nations in that direction are the same natural laws that has formed societies and are part of evolution. These evolutionary laws exist disregarding whether men recognize them.\nSimilarly, Friedrich Ratzel observed that the \"drive toward the building of continually larger states continues throughout the entirety of history\" and is active in the present. He drew \"Seven Laws of Expansionism\". His seventh law stated: \"The general trend toward amalgamation transmits the tendency of territorial growth from state to state and increases the tendency in the process of transmission.\" He commented on this law to make its meaning clear: \"There is on this small planet sufficient space for only one great state.\"\nTwo other contemporaries\u2014Kang Youwei and George Vacher de Lapouge\u2014stressed that imperial expansion cannot indefinitely proceed on the definite surface of the globe and therefore world empire is imminent. Kang Youwei in 1885 believed that the imperial trend will culminate in the contest between Washington and Berlin and Vacher de Lapouge in 1899 estimated that the final contest will be between Russia and America in which America is likely to triumph.\nThe above envisaged contests indeed took place, known to us as World War I and II. Writing during the First, Oswald Spengler in \"The Decline of the West\" compared two emergences of universal empires and implied for the modern world: The Chinese League of States failed as well as the Taoist idea of intellectual self-disarmament. The Chinese states defended their last independence with bitterness but in vain. Also in vain Rome attempted to avoid conquest of the Hellenistic east. Imperialism is so necessary a product of any civilization that when a strongest people refuse to assume the role of master, it is pushed into it. It is the same with us. The Hague Conference of 1907 was the prelude of World War, the Washington Conference of 1921 will have been that of other wars. Napoleon introduced the idea of military world empire different from the preceding European maritime empires. The contest \"for the heritage of the whole world\" will culminate \"within two generations\" (from 1922). The destinies of small states are \"without importance to the great march of things.\" The strongest race will win and seize the management of the world.\nWriting during the next World War, political scientists Derwent Whittlesey, Robert Strausz-Hup\u00e9 and John H. Herz concluded: \"Now that the earth is at last parceled out, consolidation has commenced.\" In \"this world of fighting superstates there could be no end to war until one state had subjected all others, until world empire had been achieved by the strongest. This undoubtedly is the logical final stage in the geopolitical theory of evolution.\"\nWriting in the last year of the War, American theologian Parley Paul Wormer, German historian Ludwig Dehio, and Hungarian-born writer Emery Reves drew similar conclusions. Fluctuating but persistent movement occurred through the centuries toward ever greater unity. The forward movement toward ever larger unities continues and there is no reason to conclude that it has come to an end. More likely, the greatest convergence of all time is at hand. \"Possibly this is the deeper meaning of the savage world conflicts\" of the 20th century.\nThe famous \"Anatomy of Peace\" by Reves, written and published in 1945, supposed that without the industrial power of the United States, Hitler already might have established world empire. Proposing world federalism, the book warned: Every dynamic force, every economic and technological reality, every \"law of history\" and logic \"indicates that we are on the verge of a period of empire building,\" which is \"the last phase of the struggle for the conquest of the world.\" As an elimination contest, one of the three remaining powers or a combination \"will achieve by force that unified control made mandatory by the times we live in\u2026 Anyone of three, by defeating the other two, would conquer and rule the world.\" If we fail to institute a unified control over the world in democratic way, the \"iron law of history\" would compel us to wage wars until world empire is finally attained through conquest. Since the former way is improbable due human blindness, we should precipitate the unification by conquest as quickly as possible and start the restoration of human liberties within the world empire.\nAtomic bomb and empire.\nReves added \"Postscript\" to the \"Anatomy\", opening: \"A few weeks after the publication of this book, the first atomic bomb exploded over the city of Hiroshima\u2026\" This new physical fact however has changed nothing in the political situation. The world empire remains inevitable and nothing else in the book would have been said differently had it been written after August 6, 1945. Not much chance we have to establish world government before the next horrible war between the two superpowers and whoever is victorious would establish the world empire. The book sold an exceptional 800,000 copies in thirty languages, was endorsed by Albert Einstein and numerous other prominent figures, and in 1950 Reves was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize.\nThe year after the War and in the first year of the nuclear age, Einstein and British philosopher Bertrand Russell, known as prominent pacifists, outlined for the near future a perspective of world empire (world government established by force). Einstein believed that, unless world government is established by agreement, an imperial world government would come by war or wars. Russell expected a third World War to result in a world government under the empire of the United States. Three years later, another prominent pacifist, theologian Reinhold Niebuhr, generalized on the ancient Empires of Egypt, Babylon, Persia and Greece to imply for the modern world: \"The analogy in present global terms would be the final unification of the world through the preponderant power of either America or Russia, whichever proved herself victorious in the final struggle.\"\nRussian colleague of Russell and Niebuhr, Georgy Fedotov, wrote in 1945: All empires are but stages on the way to the sole empire which must swallow all others. The only question is who will build it and on which foundations. Universal unity is the only alternative to annihilation. Unity by conference is utopian but unity by conquest by the strongest power is not and probably the uncompleted in this War will be completed in the next. \"Pax Atlantica\" is the best of possible outcomes.\nOriginally drafted as a secret study for the Office of Strategic Services (the precursor of the CIA) in 1944 and published as a book three years later, \"The Struggle for the World...\" by James Burnham concludes: If either of the two Superpowers wins, the result would be a universal empire which in our case would also be a world empire. The historical stage for a world empire had already been set prior to and independently of the discovery of atomic weapons but these weapons make a world empire inevitable and imminent. \"The atomic weapons ... will not permit the world to wait.\" Only a world empire can establish monopoly on atomic weapons and thus guarantee the survival of civilization. A world empire \"is in fact the objective of the Third World War which, in its preliminary stages, has already began\". The issue of a world empire \"will be decided, and in our day. In the course of the decision, both of the present antagonists may, it is true, be destroyed, but one of them must be.\"\nThe next year, world historian Crane Brinton similarly supposed that the bomb may in the hands of a very skillful and lucky nation prove to be the weapon that permits that nation to unify the world by imperial conquest, to do what Napoleon and Hitler failed to do. Combined with other \"wonders of science,\" it would permit a quick and easy conquest of the world. In 1951, Hans Morgenthau concluded that the \"best\" outcome of World War III would be world empire:\nExpert on earlier civilizations, Toynbee, further developed the subject of World War III leading to world empire:\nThe year this volume of \"A Study of History\" was published, US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles announced \"a knock-out blow\" as an official doctrine, a detailed Plan was elaborated and \"Fortune\" magazine mapped the design. Section VIII, \"Atomic Armaments\", of the famous National Security Council Report 68 (NSC 68), approved by President Harry Truman in 1951, uses the term \"blow\" 17 times, mostly preceded by such adjectives as \"powerful\", \"overwhelming\", or \"crippling\". Another term applied by the strategists was \"Sunday punch\".\nHaving modeled the rise of the world empire on the cases of previous empires, Toynbee noted that, by contrast, the modern ultimate \"blow\" would be atomic. But he remains optimistic: No doubt, the modern world has far greater capacity to reconstruct than the earlier civilizations had.\nA pupil of Toynbee, William McNeill, associated with the case of ancient China, which \"put a quietus upon the disorders of the warring states by erecting an imperial bureaucratic structure ... The warring states of the Twentieth century seem headed for a similar resolution of their conflicts.\" The ancient \"resolution\" McNeill evoked was one of the most sweeping universal conquests in world history, performed by Qin in 230\u2013221 BC. Chinese classic Sima Qian (d. 86 BC) described the event (6:234): \"Qin raised troops on a grand scale\" and \"the whole world celebrated a great bacchanal\". Herman Kahn of the RAND Corporation criticized an assembled group of SAC officers for their war plan (SIOP-62). He did not use the term bacchanal but he coined on the occasion an associating word: \"Gentlemen, you do not have a war plan. You have a \"war orgasm\"!\" History did not completely repeat itself but it passed close.\nCircumscription theory.\nAccording to the circumscription theory of Robert Carneiro, \"the more sharply circumscribed area, the more rapidly it will become politically unified.\" The Empires of Egypt, China and Japan are named the most durable political structures in human history. Correspondingly, these are the three most circumscribed civilizations in human history. The Empires of Egypt (established by Narmer c. 3000 BC) and China (established by Cheng in 221 BC) endured for over two millennia. German Sociologist Friedrich Tenbruck, criticizing the Western idea of progress, emphasized that China and Egypt remained at one particular stage of development for millennia. This stage was universal empire. The development of Egypt and China came to a halt once their empires \"reached the limits of their natural habitat\". Sinology does not recognize the Eurocentric view of the \"inevitable\" imperial fall; Egyptology and Japanology pose equal challenges.\nCarneiro explored the Bronze Age civilizations. Stuart J. Kaufman, Richard Little and William Wohlforth researched the next three millennia, comparing eight civilizations. They conclude: The \"rigidity of the borders\" contributed importantly to hegemony in every concerned case. Hence, \"when the system's borders are rigid, the probability of hegemony is high\".\nThe circumscription theory was stressed in the comparative studies of the Roman and Chinese Empires. The circumscribed Chinese Empire recovered from all falls, while the fall of Rome, by contrast, was fatal. \"What counteracted this [imperial] tendency in Europe ... was a countervailing tendency for the geographical boundaries of the system to expand.\" If \"Europe had been a closed system, some great power would eventually have succeeded in establishing absolute supremacy over the other states in the region\".\nIn the 1945 book, \"The Precarious Balance\", on four centuries of the European power struggle, Ludwig Dehio explained the durability of the European states system by its overseas expansion: \"Overseas expansion and the system of states were born at the same time; the vitality that burst the bounds of the Western world also destroyed its unity.\" In a more famous 1945 book, Reves similarly argued that the era of outward expansion is forever closed and the historic trend of expansion will result in direct collision between the remaining powers. Edward Carr causally linked the end of the overseas outlet for imperial expansion and World Wars. In the nineteenth century, he wrote during the Second World War, imperialist wars were waged against \"primitive\" peoples. \"It was silly for European countries to fight against one another when they could still ... maintain social cohesion by continuous expansion in Asia and Africa. Since 1900, however, this has no longer been possible: \"the situation has radically changed\". Now wars are between \"imperial powers.\" Hans Morgenthau wrote that the very imperial expansion into relatively empty geographical spaces in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth centuries, in Africa, Eurasia, and western North America, deflected great power politics into the periphery of the earth, thereby reducing conflict. For example, the more attention Russia, France and the United States paid to expanding into far-flung territories in imperial fashion, the less attention they paid to one another, and the more peaceful, in a sense, the world was. But by the late nineteenth century, the consolidation of the great nation-states and empires of the West was consummated, and territorial gains could only be made at the expense of one another. John H. Herz outlined one \"chief function\" of the overseas expansion and the impact of its end:\nSome later commentators drew similar conclusions:\nThe opportunity for any system to expand in size seems almost a necessary condition for it to remain balanced, at least over the long haul. Far from being impossible or exceedingly improbable, systemic hegemony is likely under two conditions: \"when the boundaries of the international system remain stable and no new major powers emerge from outside the system.\" With the system becoming global, further expansion is precluded. The geopolitical condition of \"global closure\" will remain to the end of history. Since \"the contemporary international system is global, we can rule out the possibility that geographic expansion of the system will contribute to the emergence of a new balance of power, as it did so many times in the past.\" As Quincy Wright had put it, \"this process can no longer continue without interplanetary wars.\"\nOne of leading experts on world-system theory, Christopher Chase-Dunn, noted that the circumscription theory is applicable for the global system, since the global system is circumscribed. In fact, within less than a century of its circumscribed existence the global system overcame the centuries-old balance of power and reached the unipolarity. Given \"constant spatial parameters\" of the global system, its unipolar structure is neither historically unusual nor theoretically surprising.\nRandall Schweller theorized that a \"closed international system\", such as the global became a century ago, would reach \"entropy\" in a kind of thermodynamic law. Once the state of entropy is reached, there is no going back. The initial conditions are lost forever. Stressing the curiosity of the fact, Schweller writes that since the moment the modern world became a closed system, the process has worked in only one direction: from many poles to two poles to one pole. Thus unipolarity might represent the entropy\u2014stable and permanent loss of variation\u2014in the global system.\nPresent.\nChalmers Johnson argues that the US global network of hundreds of military bases already represents a global empire in its initial form:\nSimon Dalby associates the network of bases with the Roman imperial system:\nKenneth Pomeranz and Harvard Historian Niall Ferguson share the above-cited views: \"With American military bases in over 120 countries, we have hardly seen the end of empire.\" This \"vast archipelago of US military bases \u2026 far exceeds 19th-century British ambitions. Britain's imperium consisted of specific, albeit numerous, colonies and clients; the American imperial vision is much more global\u2026\"\nAnother Harvard Historian Charles S. Maier opens his \"Among Empires: American Ascendancy and Its Predecessors\" with these words: \"What a substratum for empire! Compared with which, the foundation of the Macedonian, the Roman and the British, sink into insignificance.\"\nOne of the most accepted distinctions between earlier empires and the American Empire is the latter's \"global\" or \"planetary\" scope. French former Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine wondered: \"The situation is unprecedented: What previous empire subjugated the entire world...?\" The quests for universal empire are old but the present quest outdoes the previous in \"the notable respect of being the first to actually be global in its reach.\" Another historian Paul Kennedy, who wrote prediction talks of the imminent US \"imperial overstretch,\" in 2002 acknowledged about the present world system:\nWalter Russell Mead observes that the United States attempts to recreate \"globally\" what the ancient empires of Egypt, China and Rome had each accomplished on a regional basis. Professor Emeritus of Sociology at the University of Leeds, Zygmunt Bauman, concludes that due to its planetary dimension, the new empire cannot be drawn on a map:\n\"Times Atlas of Empires\" numbers 70 empires in the world history. Niall Ferguson lists numerous parallels between them and the United States. He concludes: \"To those who would still insist on American exceptionalism, the historian of empires can only retort: as exceptional as all the other 69 empires.\" Fareed Zakaria stressed one element not exceptional for the American Empire\u2014the concept of exceptionalism. All dominant empires thought they were special.\nFuture.\nIn 1945, Historian Ludwig Dehio predicted global unification due to the circumscription of the global system, although he did not use this term. Being global, the system can neither expand nor be subject to external intrusion as the European states system had been for centuries:\nFifteen years later, Dehio confirmed his hypothesis: The European system owed its durability to its overseas outlet. \"But how can a multiple grouping of world states conceivably be supported from outside in the framework of a finite globe?\"\nDuring the same time, Quincy Wright developed a similar concept. Balance-of-power politics has aimed less at preserving peace than at preserving the independence of states and preventing the development of world empire. In the course of history, the balance of power repeatedly re-emerged, but on ever-wider scale. Eventually, the scale became global. Unless we proceed to \"interplanetary wars,\" this pattern can no longer continue. In spite of significant reversals, the \"trend towards world unity\" can \"scarcely be denied.\" World unity appears to be \"the limit toward which the process of world history seems to tend.\"\nThe same \"interplanetary\" motif is present also in the Anatomy of Peace: The era of outward expansion is forever closed. \"Until and unless we are able to communicate with another planet, the theater of human history will be limited to geographically determined, constant and known dimensions.\" The historic trend of expansion will result in direct collision between the remaining powers. Multiplied by modern technology, the centripetal forces will accomplish what the greatest empires of the past failed. \"For the first time in human history, one power can conquer and rule the world.\"\nThe \"Father of American Anthropology,\" Franz Boas, known for his historical particularism and cultural relativism, outlined the \"inexorable laws of history\" by which political units grow larger in size and smaller in number. The process began in the earliest times and has continued almost always in the same direction. In the long run, the tendency to unification has been more powerful than of disintegration. \"Thus the history of mankind shows us the grand spectacle of the grouping of man in units of ever increasing size.\" The progress in the direction of unification has been so regular and so marked that we must needs conclude that the same tendencies will govern our history in the future. Today the unity of the world is not less conceivable than the modern nations were in the early history. The practical difficulties that stand in the way of the formation of still larger units count for nothing before the \"inexorable laws of history.\"\nSeven later scholars\u2014Hornell Hart, Raoul Naroll, Louis Morano, Rein Taagepera, the author of the circumscription theory Robert Carneiro and Jesse H. Ausubel &amp; Cesare Marchetti\u2014researched expanding imperial cycles. All argued that these cycles represent an historical trend leading to world empire. Naroll and Carneiro also found this outcome \"close at hand,\" c. 2200 and 2300 respectively. In 2013, Marchetti and Ausubel estimated that the global empire is to rise within \"a couple more generations.\"\nThe founder of the Paneuropean Union, Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi, writing yet in 1943, drew a more specific and immediate future imperial project: After the War America is bound \"to take over the command of the skies.\" The danger of \"the utter annihilation of all enemy towns and lands\" can \"only be prevented by the air superiority of a single power ... America's air role is the only alternative to intercontinental wars.\" Despite his outstanding anti-imperialism, Coudenhove-Kalergi detailed:\nCoudenhove-Kalergi envisaged a kind of Pax Americana modeled on \"Pax Romana\":\nThis period would be necessary transitory stage before World State is eventually established, though he did not specify how the last transformation is expected to occur. Coudenhove-Kalergi's follower in the teleological theory of World State, Toynbee, specified two ways. One is by wars going on to a bitter end at which one surviving great power \"knocks out\" its last remaining competitor and establishes world empire, like the earlier empires used to on the regional scale. The other alternative is the United Nations. Having devoted his life to the study of history and international affairs, Toynbee did not bet on the United Nations. Instead, he identified symptoms of the traditional power politics leading to the world empire by a universal conquest.\nToynbee emphasized that the world is ripe for conquest: \"...Hitler's eventual failure to impose peace on the world by the force of arms was due, not to any flaw in his thesis that the world was ripe for conquest, but to an accidental combination of incidental errors in his measures...\" But \"in falling by so narrow a margin to win the prize of world-dominion for himself, Hitler had left the prize dangling within the reach of any successor capable of pursuing the same aims of world-conquest with a little more patience, prudence, and tact.\" With his \"revolution of destruction,\" Hitler has performed the \"yeoman service\" for \"some future architect of a \"Pax Ecumenica\"...\u00a0For a post-Hitlerian empire-builder, Hitler's derelict legacy was a gift of the Gods.\"\nThe next \"architect of a Pax Ecumenica,\" known more commonly as Pax Americana, demonstrated \"more patience, prudence, and tact.\" Consequently, as President Dwight Eisenhower put it, the NATO allies became \"almost psychopathic\" whenever anyone talked about a US withdrawal, and the reception of his successor John F. Kennedy in Berlin was \"almost hysterical,\" as Chancellor Konrad Adenauer characterized it. John Ikenberry finds that the Europeans wanted a stronger, more formal and more imperial system than the United States was initially willing to provide. In the end the United States settled for this \"form of empire\u2014a Pax Americana with formal commitments to Europe.\" According to a much debated thesis, the United States became \"empire by invitation.\" The period discussed in the thesis (1945\u20131952) ended precisely the year Toynbee theorized on \"some future architect of a Pax Ecumenica.\"\nDissociating America from Rome, Eisenhower gave a pessimistic forecast. In 1951, before he became president, he had written on West Europe: \"We cannot be a modern Rome guarding the far frontiers with our legions if for no other reason than that these are not, politically, our frontiers. What we must do is to assist these [West European] peoples.\" Two years later, he wrote: When it was decided to deploy US divisions to Europe, no one had \"for an instant\" thought that they would remain there for \"several decades\"\u2014that the United States could \"build a sort of Roman Wall with its own troops and so protect the world.\"\nEisenhower assured Soviet first secretary Nikita Khrushchev on Berlin in 1959: \"Clearly we did not contemplate 50 years in occupation there.\" It lasted, remarks Marc Trachtenberg, from July 1945 to September 1994, 10 months short of 50 years. Notably, when the US troops eventually left, they left eastward. Confirming the theory of the \"empire by invitation,\" with their first opportunity East European states extended the \"invitation.\"\nOswald Spengler envisaged the \"Imperial Age\" for the world in both senses of \"empire,\" spatial (as a world-wide unit ruled by one center) and governmental (as ruled by Emperor). Published in 1922, \"The Decline of the West\" predicts the triumph of the strongest race in the fight for the whole world within \"two generations\" and of \"Caesarism\" over democracy \"within a century.\" In 2022, the Spenglerian century ended short of global \"Caesarism,\" albeit two years before its end Donald Trump had been advised to cross the Rubicon.\nChalmers Johnson regards the global military reach of the United States as empire in its \"initial\" form. Dimitri Simes finds that most of the world sees the United States as a \"nascent\" imperial power. Some scholars concerned how this empire would look in its ultimate form. The ultimate form of empire was described by Michael Doyle in his \"Empires\". It is empire in which its two main components\u2014the ruling core and the ruled periphery\u2014merged to form one integrated whole. At this stage the \"empire\" as defined ceases to exist and becomes \"world state\". Doyle exemplifies the transformation on the case of the Roman Emperor Caracalla whose edict in AD 212 extended the Roman citizenship to all inhabitants of the Mediterranean world.\nDoyle's case of the Roman Empire had also been evoked by Susan Strange in her 1988 article, \"The Future of the American Empire.\" Strange emphasized that the most persistent empires were those which best managed to integrate the ruling core and the peripheral allies. The article is partly a reply on the published a year earlier bestseller \"The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers\" which predicted imminent US \"imperial overstretch.\" Strange found this outcome unlikely, stressing the fact that the peripheral allies have been successfully recruited into the American Empire.\nEnvisaging a world empire of either the United States or the Soviet Union (whoever is victorious in World War III), Bertrand Russell projected the Roman scenario too: \"Like the Romans, they will, in the course of time, extend citizenship to the vanquished. There will then be a true world state, and it will be possible to forget that it will have owed its origin to conquest.\" International Relations scholar Alexander Wendt supposes world empire by universal conquest and subsequent consolidation, provided the conquering power recognizes all conquered members. For his example he also invokes the Roman Empire. In satirical criticism of the European pro-American stance in the wake of September 11, French Philosopher R\u00e9gis Debray warned that the logical culmination of the motto \"We are all Americans\" would be a modernized Edict of Caracalla extending US citizenship to all the West and thus establishing the United States of the West.\nTo the case of Caracalla, Toynbee added the Abbasid cosmopolitan reformation of 750 AD. Both \"were good auguries for the prospect that, in a post-Modern chapter of Western history, a supranational commonwealth originally based on the hegemony of a paramount power over its satellites might eventually be put on the sounder basis of a constitutional partnership in which all the people of all the partner states would have their fare share in the conduct of common affairs.\" To the cases of Caracalla and the Abbasid revolution, Max Ostrovsky added the Han overthrow of Qin in 206 BC and more gradual cosmopolitan reformations he finds characteristic to all persistent empires and expects in the future global empire.\nCrane Brinton expected that the world empire would not be built instantly but not as slowly as Rome, for much in the modern world has been speeded up. Charles Galton Darwin, a grandson of the father of Evolution Theory, suggested that China, as an isolated and enduring civilization, seems to provide the most relevant model for the global future. As the Chinese Empire, the regions of the world, periodically albeit more rarely, will be united by force into an uneasy world-empire, which will endure for a period until it falls. Along China, Ostrovsky mentions Egypt as a model for the future but, by contrast, estimates that the intermediate periods of the global empire will be shorter and rarer."}
{"id": "10160", "revid": "48323887", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10160", "title": "Final Solution", "text": "The Final Solution (, ) or the Final Solution to the Jewish Question (, ) refers to a plan orchestrated by the Nazi regime of Germany during World War II for the genocide of individuals they defined as Jews. The \"Final Solution to the Jewish question\" was the official code name for the murder of all Jews within reach, which was not restricted to the European continent. This policy of deliberate and systematic genocide starting across German-occupied Europe was formulated in procedural and geopolitical terms by Nazi leadership in January 1942 at the Wannsee Conference held near Berlin, and culminated in the Holocaust, which saw the murder of 90% of Polish Jews, and two-thirds of the Jewish population of Europe.\nThe nature and timing of the decisions that led to the Final Solution is an intensely researched and debated aspect of the Holocaust. The program evolved during the first 25 months of war leading to the attempt at \"murdering every last Jew in the German grasp\". Christopher Browning, a historian specializing in the Holocaust, wrote that most historians agree that the Final Solution cannot be attributed to a single decision made at one particular point in time. \"It is generally accepted the decision-making process was prolonged and incremental.\" In 1940, following the Fall of France, Adolf Eichmann devised the Madagascar Plan to move Europe's Jewish population to the French colony, but the plan was abandoned for logistical reasons, mainly a naval blockade. There were also preliminary plans to deport Jews to Palestine and Siberia. Raul Hilberg wrote that, in 1941, in the first phase of the mass-murder of Jews, the mobile killing units began to pursue their victims across occupied eastern territories; in the second phase, stretching across all of German-occupied Europe, the Jewish victims were sent on death trains to centralized extermination camps built for the purpose of systematic murder of Jews.\nBackground.\nThe term \"Final Solution\" was a euphemism used by the Nazis to refer to their plan for the annihilation of the Jewish people. Some historians argue that the usual tendency of the German leadership was to be extremely guarded when discussing the Final Solution. For example, Mark Roseman wrote that euphemisms were \"their normal mode of communicating about murder\". However, Jeffrey Herf has argued that the role of euphemisms in Nazi propaganda has been exaggerated, and in fact Nazi leaders often made direct threats against Jews. For example, during his speech of 30 January 1939, Hitler threatened \"the annihilation of the Jewish race in Europe\".\nFrom gaining power in January 1933 until the outbreak of war in September 1939, the Nazi persecution of the Jews in Germany was focused on intimidation, expropriating their money and property, and encouraging them to emigrate. According to the Nazi Party policy statement, Jews and the Romani people were the only \"alien people in Europe\". In 1936, the Bureau of Romani Affairs in Munich was taken over by Interpol and renamed the Center for Combating the Gypsy Menace. Introduced at the end of 1937, the \"final solution of the Gypsy Question\" entailed round-ups, expulsions, and incarceration of Romani in concentration camps built at, until this point, Dachau, Buchenwald, Flossenb\u00fcrg, Mauthausen, Natzweiler, Ravensbruck, Taucha and Westerbork. After the Anschluss with Austria in 1938, Central Offices for Jewish Emigration were established in Vienna and Berlin to increase Jewish emigration, without covert plans for their forthcoming annihilation.\nThe outbreak of war and the invasion of Poland brought a population of 3.5 million Polish Jews under the control of the Nazi and Soviet security forces, and marked the start of the Holocaust in Poland. In the German-occupied zone of Poland, Jews were forced into hundreds of makeshift ghettos, pending other arrangements.\nIn April 1941, the German agriculture and interior ministries designated the SS as an authorized applier of Zyklon B, which meant they were able to use it without any further training or governmental oversight. The launch of Operation Barbarossa in June 1941 coincided with the German top echelon's newfound intent to pursue Hitler's new anti-Semitic plan to eradicate, rather than expel, Jews. Hitler's earlier ideas about forcible removal of Jews from the German-controlled territories to achieve \"Lebensraum\" were abandoned after the failure of the air campaign against Britain, initiating a naval blockade of Germany.&lt;ref name=\"CRB/Path\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; \"Reichsf\u00fchrer-SS\" Heinrich Himmler became the chief architect of a new plan, which came to be called \"The Final Solution to the Jewish question\". On 31 July 1941, \"Reichsmarschall\" Hermann G\u00f6ring wrote to Reinhard Heydrich (Himmler's deputy and chief of the RSHA), authorising him to make the \"necessary preparations\" for a \"total solution of the Jewish question\" and coordinate with all affected organizations. G\u00f6ring also instructed Heydrich to submit concrete proposals for the implementation of the new projected goal.\nBroadly speaking, the extermination of Jews was carried out in two major operations. With the onset of Operation Barbarossa, mobile killing units of the SS, the \"Einsatzgruppen\", and Order Police battalions were dispatched to the occupied Soviet Union for the express purpose of murdering all Jews. During the early stages of the invasion, Himmler himself visited Bia\u0142ystok at the beginning of July 1941, and requested that, \"as a matter of principle, any Jew\" behind the German-Soviet frontier was to be \"regarded as a partisan\". His new orders gave the SS and police leaders full authority for the mass-murder behind the front lines. By August 1941, all Jewish men, women, and children were shot. In the second phase of annihilation, the Jewish inhabitants of central, western, and south-eastern Europe were transported by Holocaust trains to camps with newly built gassing facilities. Raul Hilberg wrote: \"In essence, the killers of the occupied USSR moved to the victims, whereas outside this arena, the victims were brought to the killers. The two operations constitute an evolution not only chronologically, but also in complexity.\" Massacres of about one million Jews occurred before plans for the Final Solution were fully implemented in 1942, but it was only with the decision to annihilate the entire Jewish population that extermination camps such as Auschwitz II Birkenau and Treblinka were fitted with permanent gas chambers to murder large numbers of Jews in a relatively short period of time.\nThe plans to exterminate all the Jews of Europe were formalized at the Wannsee Conference, held at an SS guesthouse near Berlin, on 20 January 1942. The conference was chaired by Heydrich and attended by 15 senior officials of the Nazi Party and the German government. Most of those attending were representatives of the Interior Ministry, the Foreign Ministry, and the Justice Ministry, including Ministers for the Eastern Territories. At the conference, Heydrich indicated that approximately 11,000,000 Jews in Europe would fall under the provisions of the \"Final Solution\". This figure included not only Jews residing in Axis-controlled Europe, but also the Jewish populations of the United Kingdom and of neutral nations (Switzerland, Ireland, Sweden, Spain, Portugal, and European Turkey). Eichmann's biographer David Cesarani wrote that Heydrich's main purpose in convening the conference was to assert his authority over the various agencies dealing with Jewish issues. \"The simplest, most decisive way that Heydrich could ensure the smooth flow of deportations\" to death camps, according to Cesarani, \"was by asserting his total control over the fate of the Jews in the Reich and the east\" under the single authority of the RSHA. A copy of the minutes of this meeting (later called the Wannsee Conference Protocol) was found by the Allies in March 1947; it was too late to serve as evidence during the first Nuremberg Trial, but was used by prosecutor General Telford Taylor in the subsequent Nuremberg Trials.\nAfter the end of World War II, surviving archival documents provided a clear record of the Final Solution policies and actions of Nazi Germany. They included the Wannsee Conference Protocol, which documented the co-operation of various German state agencies in the SS-led Holocaust, as well as some 3,000 tons of original German records captured by Allied armies, including the \"Einsatzgruppen\" reports, which documented the progress of the mobile killing units assigned, among other tasks, to murder Jewish civilians during the attack on the Soviet Union in 1941. The evidential proof which documented the mechanism of the Holocaust was submitted at Nuremberg.\nPhase one: death squads of Operation Barbarossa.\nThe Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union codenamed Operation Barbarossa, which commenced on 22 June 1941, set in motion a \"war of annihilation\" which quickly opened the door to the systematic mass murder of European Jews. For Hitler, Bolshevism was merely \"the most recent and most nefarious manifestation of the eternal Jewish threat\". On 3 March 1941, Wehrmacht Joint Operations Staff Chief Alfred Jodl repeated Hitler's declaration that the \"Jewish-Bolshevik intelligentsia would have to be eliminated\" and that the forthcoming war would be a confrontation between two completely opposing cultures. In May 1941, Gestapo leader Heinrich M\u00fcller wrote a preamble to the new law limiting the jurisdiction of military courts in prosecuting troops for criminal actions because: \"This time, the troops will encounter an especially dangerous element from the civilian population, and therefore, have the right and obligation to secure themselves.\"\nHimmler and Heydrich assembled a force of about 3,000 men from Security Police, Gestapo, Kripo, SD, and the Waffen-SS, as the so-called \"special commandos of the security forces\" known as the \"Einsatzgruppen\", to eliminate both communists and Jews in occupied territories. These forces were supported by 21 battalions of Orpo Reserve Police under Kurt Daluege, adding up to 11,000 men. The explicit orders given to the Order Police varied between locations, but for Police Battalion 309 participating in the first mass murder of 5,500 Polish Jews in the Soviet-controlled Bia\u0142ystok (a Polish provincial capital), Major Weiss explained to his officers that Barbarossa is a war of annihilation against Bolshevism, and that his battalions would proceed ruthlessly against all Jews, regardless of age or sex.\nAfter crossing the Soviet demarcation line in 1941, what had been regarded as exceptional in the Greater Germanic Reich became a normal way of operating in the east. The crucial taboo against the murder of women and children was breached not only in Bia\u0142ystok but also in Garg\u017edai in late June. By July, significant numbers of women and children were being murdered behind all front-lines not only by the Germans but also by the local Ukrainian and Lithuanian auxiliary forces. On 29 July 1941, at a meeting of SS officers in Vileyka (Polish Wilejka, now Belarus), the \"Einsatzgruppen\" had been given a dressing-down for their low execution figures. Heydrich himself issued an order to include the Jewish women and children in all subsequent shooting operations. Accordingly, by the end of July the entire Jewish population of Vileyka, men, women and children, were murdered. Around 12 August, no less than two-thirds of the Jews shot in Surazh were women and children of all ages. In late August 1941 the \"Einsatzgruppen\" murdered 23,600 Jews in the Kamianets-Podilskyi massacre. A month later, the largest mass shooting of Soviet Jews took place on 29\u201330 September in the ravine of Babi Yar, near Kyiv, where more than 33,000 Jewish people of all ages were systematically machine-gunned. In mid-October 1941, HSSPF South, under the command of Friedrich Jeckeln, had reported the indiscriminate murder of more than 100,000 people.\nBy the end of December 1941, before the Wannsee Conference, over 439,800 Jewish people had been murdered, and the Final Solution policy in the east became common knowledge within the SS. Entire regions were reported \"free of Jews\" by the \"Einsatzgruppen\". Addressing his district governors in the General Government on 16 December 1941, Governor-General Hans Frank said: \"But what will happen to the Jews? Do you believe they will be lodged in settlements in Ostland? In Berlin, we were told: why all this trouble; we cannot use them in the Ostland or the Reichskommissariat either; liquidate them yourselves!\" Two days later, Himmler recorded the outcome of his discussion with Hitler. The result was: \"als Partisanen auszurotten\" (\"exterminate them as partisans\"). Israeli historian Yehuda Bauer wrote that the remark is probably as close as historians will ever get to a definitive order from Hitler for the genocide carried out during the Holocaust. Within two years, the total number of shooting victims in the east had risen to between 618,000 and 800,000 Jews.\n\"Bezirk Bialystok\" and \"Reichskommissariat Ostland\".\nSeveral scholars have suggested that the Final Solution began in the newly formed district of \"Bezirk Bialystok\". The German army took over Bia\u0142ystok within days. On Friday, 27 June 1941, the Reserve Police Battalion 309 arrived in the city and set the Great Synagogue on fire with hundreds of Jewish men locked inside. The burning of the synagogue was followed by a frenzy of murders both inside the homes around the Jewish neighbourhood of Chanajki, and in the city park, lasting until night time. The next day, some 30 wagons of dead bodies were taken to mass graves. As noted by Browning, the murders were led by a commander \"who correctly intuited and anticipated the wishes of his F\u00fchrer\" without direct orders. For reasons unknown, the number of victims in the official report by Major Weis was cut in half. The next mass-shooting of Polish Jews within the newly formed \"Reichskommissariat Ostland\" took place in two days of 5\u20137 August in occupied Pi\u0144sk, where over 12,000 Jews were murdered by the \"Waffen SS\", not the \"Einsatzgruppen\". An additional 17,000 Jews perished there in a ghetto uprising crushed a year later with the aid of Belarusian Auxiliary Police.\nAn Israeli historian Dina Porat claimed that the Final Solution, i.e.: \"the systematic overall physical extermination of Jewish communities one after the other\u2014began in Lithuania\" during the massive German chase after the Red Army across the \"Reichskommissariat Ostland\". The subject of the Holocaust in Lithuania has been analysed by Konrad Kweit from USHMM who wrote: \"Lithuanian Jews were among the first victims of the Holocaust [beyond the eastern borders of occupied Poland]. The Germans carried out the mass executions [...] signaling the beginning of the 'Final Solution'.\" About 80,000 Jews were murdered in Lithuania by October (including in formerly Polish Wilno) and about 175,000 by the end of 1941 according to official reports.\n\"Reichskommissariat Ukraine\".\nWithin one week from the start of Operation Barbarossa, Heydrich issued an order to his \"Einsatzgruppen\" for the on-the-spot execution of all Bolsheviks, interpreted by the SS to mean all Jews. One of the first indiscriminate massacres of men, women, and children in Reichskommissariat Ukraine took the lives of over 4,000 Polish Jews in occupied \u0141uck on 2\u20134 July 1941, murdered by \"Einsatzkommando\" 4a assisted by the Ukrainian People's Militia. Formed officially on 20 August 1941, the \"Reichskommissariat Ukraine\"\u2014stretching from prewar east-central Poland to Crimea\u2014had become operational theatre of the \"Einsatzgruppe\" C. Within the Soviet Union proper, between 9 July 1941 and 19 September 1941 the city of Zhytomyr was made \"Judenfrei\" in three murder operations conducted by German and Ukrainian police in which 10,000 Jews perished. In the Kamianets-Podilskyi massacre of 26\u201328 August 1941 some 23,600 Jews were shot in front of open pits (including 14,000\u201318,000 people expelled from Hungary). After an incident in Bila Tserkva in which 90 small children left behind had to be shot separately, Blobel requested that Jewish mothers hold them in their arms during mass shootings. Long before the conference at Wannsee, 28,000 Jews were shot by SS and Ukrainian military in Vinnytsia on 22 September 1941, followed by the 29 September massacre of 33,771 Jews at Babi Yar. In Dnipropetrovsk, on 13 October 1941 some 10,000\u201315,000 Jews were shot. In Chernihiv, 10,000 Jews were murdered and only 260 Jews were spared. In mid-October, during the Krivoy-Rog massacre of 4,000\u20135,000 Soviet Jews the entire Ukrainian auxiliary police force actively participated. In the first days of January 1942 in Kharkiv, 12,000 Jews were murdered, but smaller massacres continued in this period on daily basis in countless other locations. In August 1942 in the presence of only a few German SS men over 5,000 Jews were massacred in Polish Zofj\u00f3wka by the Ukrainian Auxiliary Police leading to the town's complete sweep from existence.\n\"Distrikt Galizien\".\nHistorians find it difficult to determine precisely when the first concerted effort at annihilation of all Jews began in the last weeks of June 1941 during Operation Barbarossa. Dr. Samuel Drix (\"Witness to Annihilation\"), Jochaim Schoenfeld (\"Holocaust Memoirs\"), and several survivors of the Janowska concentration camp, who were interviewed in the film \"Janovska Camp at Lvov\", among other witnesses, have argued that the Final Solution began in Lw\u00f3w (Lemberg) in \"Distrikt Galizien\" of the General Government during the German advance across Soviet-occupied Poland. Statements and memoirs of survivors emphasize that, when Ukrainian nationalists and \"ad hoc\" Ukrainian People's Militia (soon reorganized as the Ukrainian Auxiliary Police) began to murder women and children, rather than only male Jews, the \"Final Solution\" had begun. Witnesses have said that such murders happened both prior to and during the pogroms reportedly triggered by the NKVD prisoner massacre. The question of whether there was some coordination between the Lithuanian and Ukrainian militias remains open (i.e. collaborating for a joint assault in Kovno, Wilno, and Lw\u00f3w).\nThe murders continued uninterrupted. On 12 October 1941, in Stanis\u0142aw\u00f3w, some 10,000\u201312,000 Jewish men, women, and children were shot at the Jewish cemetery by the German uniformed SS-men and Ukrainian Auxiliary Police during the so-called \" \". The shooters began firing at 12 noon and continued without stopping by taking turns. There were picnic tables set up on the side with bottles of vodka and sandwiches for those who needed to rest from the deafening noise of gunfire. It was the single largest massacre of Polish Jews in \"Generalgouvernement\" prior to mass gassings of \"Aktion Reinhard\", which commenced at Be\u0142\u017cec in March 1942. Notably, the extermination operations in Che\u0142mno had begun on 8 December 1941, one-and-a-half months before Wannsee, but Che\u0142mno\u2014located in \"Reichsgau Wartheland\"\u2014was not a part of Reinhard, and neither was Auschwitz-Birkenau functioning as an extermination center until November 1944 in Polish lands annexed by Hitler and added to Germany proper.\nThe conference at Wannsee gave impetus to the so-called \"second sweep\" of the Holocaust by the bullet in the east. Between April and July 1942 in Volhynia, 30,000 Jews were murdered in death pits with the help of dozens of newly formed Ukrainian \"Schutzmannschaft\". Owing to good relations with the Ukrainian \"Hilfsverwaltung\", these auxiliary battalions were deployed by the SS also in Russia Center, Russia South, and in Byelorussia; each with about 500 soldiers divided into three companies. They participated in the extermination of 150,000 Volhynian Jews alone, or 98 percent of the Jewish inhabitants of the entire region. In July 1942 the Completion of the Final Solution in the General Government territory which included \"Distrikt Galizien\", was ordered personally by Himmler. He set the initial deadline for 31 December 1942.\nPhase two: deportations to extermination camps.\nWhen the Wehrmacht invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, the area of the General Government was enlarged by the inclusion of regions that had been annexed by the Soviet Union since the 1939 invasion. The murders of Jews from the \u0141\u00f3d\u017a Ghetto in the \"Warthegau\" district began in early December 1941 with the use of gas vans (approved by Heydrich) at the Kulmhof extermination camp. Victims were misled under the deceptive guise of \"Resettlement in the East\", organised by SS Commissioners, which was also tried and tested at Che\u0142mno. By the time the European-wide Final Solution was formulated two months later, Heydrich's RSHA had already confirmed the effectiveness of industrial murder by exhaust fumes, and the strength of deception.\nConstruction work on the first killing centre at Be\u0142\u017cec in occupied Poland began in October 1941, three months before the Wannsee Conference. The new facility was operational by March the following year.&lt;ref name=\"M/MPwB\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; By mid-1942, two more death camps had been built on Polish lands: Sobib\u00f3r operational by May 1942, and Treblinka operational in July. From July 1942, the mass murder of Polish and foreign Jews took place at Treblinka as part of Operation Reinhard, the deadliest phase of the Final Solution. More Jews were murdered at Treblinka than at any other Nazi extermination camp apart from Auschwitz. By the time the mass killings of Operation Reinhard ended in 1943, roughly two million Jews in German-occupied Poland had been murdered. The total number of people murdered in 1942 in Lublin/Majdanek, Be\u0142\u017cec, Sobib\u00f3r, and Treblinka was 1,274,166 by Germany's own estimation, not counting Auschwitz II Birkenau nor \"Kulmhof\". Their bodies were buried in mass graves initially. Both Treblinka and Be\u0142\u017cec were equipped with powerful crawler excavators from Polish construction sites in the vicinity, capable of most digging tasks without disrupting surfaces. Although other methods of extermination, such as the cyanic poison Zyklon B, were already being used at other Nazi killing centres such as Auschwitz, the \"Aktion Reinhard\" camps used lethal exhaust gases from captured tank engines.\nThe \"Holocaust by bullets\" (as opposed to the \"Holocaust by gas\") went on in the territory of occupied Poland in conjunction with the ghetto uprisings, irrespective of death camps' quota. In two weeks of July 1942, the S\u0142onim Ghetto revolt, crushed with the help of Latvian, Lithuanian, and Ukrainian \"Schutzmannschaft\", cost the lives of 8,000\u201313,000 Jews. The second largest mass shooting (to that particular date) took place in late October 1942 when the insurgency was suppressed in the Pi\u0144sk Ghetto; over 26,000 men, women and children were shot with the aid of Belarusian Auxiliary Police before the ghetto's closure. During the suppression of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising (the largest single revolt by Jews during World War\u00a0II), 13,000 Jews were killed in action before May 1943. Numerous other uprisings were quelled without impacting the pre-planned Nazi deportations actions.\nAbout two-thirds of the overall number of victims of the Final Solution were murdered before February 1943, which included the main phase of the extermination programme in the West launched by Eichmann on 11 June 1942 from Berlin. The Holocaust trains run by the Deutsche Reichsbahn and several other national railway systems delivered condemned Jewish captives from as far as Belgium, Bulgaria, France, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Moravia, Netherlands, Romania, Slovakia, and even Scandinavia. The cremation of exhumed corpses to destroy any evidence left behind began in early spring and continued throughout summer. The nearly completed clandestine programme of murdering all deportees was explicitly addressed by Heinrich Himmler in his Posen speeches made to the leadership of the Nazi Party on 4 October and during a conference in Posen (Pozna\u0144) of 6 October 1943 in occupied Poland. Himmler explained why the Nazi leadership found it necessary to murder Jewish women and children along with the Jewish men. The assembled functionaries were told that the Nazi state policy was \"the extermination of the Jewish people\" as such.\nOn 19 October 1943, five days after the prisoner revolt in Sobib\u00f3r, Operation Reinhard was terminated by Odilo Globocnik on behalf of Himmler. The camps responsible for the murder of nearly 2,700,000 Jews were soon closed. Be\u0142\u017cec, Sobib\u00f3r, and Treblinka were dismantled and ploughed over before spring. The operation was followed by the single largest German massacre of Jews in the entire war carried out on 3 November 1943; with approximately 43,000 prisoners shot one-by-one simultaneously in three nearby locations by the Reserve Police Battalion 101 hand-in-hand with the Trawniki men from Ukraine. Auschwitz alone had enough capacity to fulfill the Nazis' remaining extermination needs.\nAuschwitz II Birkenau.\nUnlike Belzec, Sobibor, Treblinka, and Lublin-Majdanek, which were built in the occupied General Government territory inhabited by the largest concentrations of Jews, the killing centre at Auschwitz subcamp of Birkenau operated in Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany directly. The new gas chambers at Bunker I were finished around March 1942 when the Final Solution was officially launched at Belzec. Until mid June, 20,000 Silesian Jews were murdered there using Zyklon B. In July 1942, Bunker II became operational. In August, another 10,000\u201313,000 Polish Jews from Silesia were murdered, along with 16,000 French Jews declared 'stateless', and 7,700 Jews from Slovakia.\nThe infamous 'Gate of Death' at Auschwitz II for the incoming freight trains was built of brick and cement mortar in 1943, and the three-track rail spur was added. Until mid-August, 45,000 Thessaloniki Jews were murdered in a mere six months, including over 30,000 Jews from Sosnowiec (Sosnowitz) and Bendzin Ghettos. The spring of 1944 marked the beginning of the last phase of the Final Solution at Birkenau. The new big ramps and sidings were constructed, and two freight elevators were installed inside Crematoria II and III for moving the bodies faster. The size of the \"Sonderkommando\" was nearly quadrupled in preparation for the Special Operation Hungary (\"Sonderaktion Ungarn\"). In May 1944, Auschwitz-Birkenau became the site of one of the two largest mass murder operations in modern history, after the \"Gro\u00dfaktion Warschau\" deportations of the Warsaw Ghetto inmates to Treblinka in 1942. It is estimated that until July 1944 approximately 320,000 Hungarian Jews were gassed at Birkenau in less than eight weeks. The entire operation was photographed by the SS. In total, between April and November 1944, Auschwitz II received over 585,000 Jews from over a dozen regions as far as Greece, Italy, and France, including 426,000 Jews from Hungary, 67,000 from \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, 25,000 from Theresienstadt, and the last 23,000 Jews from the General Government. Auschwitz was liberated by the Red Army on 27 January 1945, when the gassing had already stopped.\nHistoriographic debate about the decision.\nHistorians disagree as to when and how the Nazi leadership decided that the European Jews should be exterminated. The controversy is commonly described as the functionalism versus intentionalism debate which began in the 1960s, and subsided thirty years later. In the 1990s, the attention of mainstream historians moved away from the question of top executive orders triggering the Holocaust and focused on factors that were overlooked earlier, such as personal initiative and ingenuity of countless functionaries in charge of the killing fields. No written evidence of Hitler ordering the Final Solution has ever been found to serve as a \"smoking gun\", and therefore, this one particular question remains unanswered.\nHitler made numerous predictions regarding the Holocaust of the Jews of Europe prior to the beginning of World War II. During a speech given on 30 January 1939, on the sixth anniversary of his accession to power, Hitler said:\nRaul Hilberg, in his book \"The Destruction of the European Jews\", was the first historian to systematically document and analyse the Nazi project to murder every Jew in Europe. The book was initially published in 1961, and issued in an enlarged version in 1985.\nHilberg's analysis of the steps that led to the destruction of European Jews revealed that it was \"an administrative process carried out by bureaucrats in a network of offices spanning a continent\". Hilberg divides this bureaucracy into four components or hierarchies: the Nazi Party, the civil service, industry, and the Wehrmacht armed forces\u2014but their cooperation is viewed as \"so complete that we may truly speak of their fusion into a machinery of destruction\". For Hilberg, the key stages in the destruction process were: definition and registration of the Jews; expropriation of property; concentration into ghettoes and camps; and, finally, annihilation. Hilberg gives an estimate of 5.1 million as the total number of Jews murdered. He breaks this figure down into three categories: Ghettoization and general privation: over 800,000; open-air shootings: over 1,300,000; extermination camps: up to 3,000,000.\nWith respect to the \"functionalism versus intentionalism\" debate about a master plan for the Final Solution, or the lack thereof, Hilberg posits what has been described as \"a kind of structural determinism\". Hilberg argues that \"a destruction process has an inherent pattern\" and the \"sequence of steps in a destruction process is thus determined\". If a bureaucracy is motivated \"to inflict maximum damage upon a group of people\", it is \"inevitable that a bureaucracy\u2014no matter how decentralized its apparatus or how unplanned its activities\u2014should push its victims through these stages\", culminating in their annihilation.\nIn his monograph, \"The Origins of the Final Solution: The Evolution of Nazi Jewish Policy, September 1939\u00a0\u2013 March 1942\", Christopher Browning argues that Nazi policy toward the Jews was radicalized twice: in September 1939, when the invasion of Poland implied policies of mass expulsion and massive loss of Jewish lives; and in spring 1941, when preparation for Operation Barbarossa involved the planning of mass execution, mass expulsion, and starvation\u2014to dwarf what had happened in Jewish Poland.\nBrowning believes that the \"Final Solution as it is now understood\u2014the systematic attempt to murder every last Jew within the German grasp\" took shape during a five-week period, from 18 September to 25 October 1941. During this time, the sites of the first extermination camps were selected, different methods of murder were tested, Jewish emigration was forbidden, and 11 transports departed for \u0141\u00f3d\u017a as a temporary holding station. Of this period, Browning writes, \"The vision of the Final Solution had crystallised in the minds of the Nazi leadership, and was being turned into reality.\" This was the peak of Nazi victories against the Soviet Army on the Eastern Front, and, according to Browning, the stunning series of German victories led to both an expectation that the war would soon be won, and the planning of the final destruction of the \"Jewish-Bolshevik enemy\".\nBrowning describes the creation of the extermination camps, which were responsible for the largest number of murders in the Final Solution, as bringing together three separate developments within Nazi Germany: the concentration camps which had been established in Germany since 1933; an expansion of the gassing technology of the Nazi euthanasia programme to provide a murder technique of greater efficiency and psychological detachment; and the creation of \"factories of death\" to be fed endless streams of victims by mass uprooting and deportation that utilized the experience and personnel from earlier population resettlement programmes\u2014especially the HSSPF and Adolf Eichmann's RSHA for \"Jewish affairs and evacuations\".\nPeter Longerich argues that the search for a finite date on which the Nazis embarked upon the extermination of the Jews is futile, in his book \"Holocaust: The Nazi Persecution and Murder of the Jews\" (2011). Longerich writes: \"We should abandon the notion that it is historically meaningful to try to filter the wealth of available historical material and pick out a single decision\" that led to the Holocaust.\nTimothy Snyder writes that Longerich \"grants the significance of Greiser's murder of Jews by gas at Che\u0142mno in December 1941\", but also detects a significant moment of escalation in spring 1942, which includes \"the construction of the large death factory at Treblinka for the destruction of the Warsaw Jews, and the addition of a gas chamber to the concentration camp at Auschwitz for the murder of the Jews of Silesia\". Longerich suggests that it \"was only in the summer of 1942, that mass killing was finally understood as the realization of the Final Solution, rather than as an extensively violent preliminary to some later program of slave labor and deportation to the lands of a conquered USSR\". For Longerich, to see mass-murder as the Final Solution was an acknowledgement by the Nazi leadership that there would not be a German military victory over the USSR in the near future.\nDavid Cesarani emphasises the improvised, haphazard nature of Nazi policies in response to changing war time conditions in his overview, \"Final Solution: The Fate of the European Jews 1933\u201349\" (2016). \"Cesarani provides telling examples\", wrote Mark Roseman, \"of a lack of coherence and planning for the future in Jewish policy, even when we would most expect it. The classic instance is the invasion of Poland in 1939, when not even the most elementary consideration had been given to what should happen to Poland's Jews either in the shorter or longer term. Given that Poland was home to the largest Jewish population in the world, and that, in a couple of years, it would house the extermination camps, this is remarkable.\"\nWhereas Browning places the Nazi plan to exterminate the Jews in the context of the Wehrmacht victories on the Eastern front, Cesarani argues that the German subsequent realisation that there would be no swift victory over the Soviet Union \"scuppered the last territorial 'solution' still on the table: expulsion to Siberia\". Germany's declaration of war on the United States on 11 December 1941, \"meant that holding European Jews hostage to deter the US from entering the conflict was now pointless\". Cesarani concludes, the Holocaust \"was rooted in anti-Semitism, but it was shaped by war\". The fact that the Nazis were, ultimately, so successful in murdering between five and six million Jews was not due to the efficiency of Nazi Germany or the clarity of their policies. \"Rather, the catastrophic rate of killing was due to German persistence ... and the duration of the murderous campaigns. This last factor was largely a consequence of allied military failure.\"\nThe entry of the U.S. into the War is also crucial to the time-frame proposed by Christian Gerlach, who argued in his 1997 thesis that the Final Solution decision was announced on 12 December 1941, when Hitler addressed a meeting of the Nazi Party (the \"Reichsleiter\") and of regional party leaders (the \"Gauleiter\"). The day after Hitler's speech, on 13 December 1941, Joseph Goebbels wrote in his diary:\nCesarani notes that by 1943, as the military position of the German forces deteriorated, the Nazi leadership became more openly explicit about the Final Solution. In March, Goebbels confided to his diary: \"On the Jewish question especially, we are in it so deeply that there is no getting out any longer. And that is a good thing. Experience teaches that a movement and a people who have burned their bridges fight with much greater determination and fewer constraints than those that have a chance of retreat.\"\nWhen Himmler addressed senior SS personnel and leading members of the regime in the Posen speeches on 4 October 1943, he used \"the fate of the Jews as a sort of blood bond to tie the civil and military leadership to the Nazi cause\"."}
{"id": "10163", "revid": "860322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10163", "title": "Eusebius (disambiguation)", "text": "Eusebius (263-339 AD) was a Christian exegete, historian and polemicist.\nEusebius may also refer to:\nEusebius is also the name of:"}
{"id": "10164", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10164", "title": "Eurystheus", "text": "In Greek mythology, Eurystheus (; , ) was king of Tiryns, one of three Mycenaean strongholds in the Argolid, although other authors including Homer and Euripides cast him as ruler of Argos.\nFamily.\nEurystheus was the son of King Sthenelus and Nicippe (also called Antibia or Archippe), and he was a grandson of the hero Perseus. His sisters were Alcyone and Medusa (Astymedusa).\nEurystheus married Antimache, daughter of Amphidamas of Arcadia. Their children were Admete, Alexander, Eurybius, Mentor, Perimedes, Iphimedon, and Eurypylus.\nMythology.\nLabours of Heracles.\nIn the contest of wills between Hera and Zeus over whose candidate would be hero, fated to defeat the remaining creatures representing an old order and bring about the reign of the Twelve Olympians, Eurystheus was Hera's candidate and Heracles\u2014though his name implies that at one archaic stage of myth-making he had carried \"Hera's fame\"\u2014was the candidate of Zeus. The arena for the actions that would bring about this deep change are the Twelve Labors imposed on Heracles by Eurystheus. The immediate necessity for the Labours of Heracles is as penance for Heracles' murder of his own family, in a fit of madness, which had been sent by Hera; however, further human rather than mythic motivation is supplied by mythographers who note that their respective families had been rivals for the throne of Mycenae. Details of the individual episodes may be found in the article on the Labours of Heracles, but Hera was connected with all of the opponents Heracles had to overcome.\nHeracles' human stepfather Amphitryon was also a grandson of Perseus, and since Amphitryon's father (Alcaeus) was older than Eurystheus' father (Sthenelus), he might have received the kingdom, but Sthenelus had banished Amphitryon for accidentally killing (a familiar mytheme) the eldest son in the family (Electryon). When, shortly before his son Heracles was born, Zeus proclaimed the next-born descendant of Perseus should get the kingdom, Hera thwarted his ambitions by delaying Alcmene's labour and having her candidate Eurystheus born prematurely at seven months. Heracles' first task was to slay the Nemean Lion and bring back its skin, which Heracles decided to wear. Eurystheus was so scared by Heracles' fearsome guise that he hid in a subterranean bronze winejar, and from that moment forth all labors were communicated to Heracles through a herald, Copreus.\nFor his second labour, to slay the Lernaean Hydra, Heracles took with him his nephew, Iolaus, as a charioteer. When Eurystheus found out that Heracles' nephew had helped him he declared that the labour had not been completed alone and as a result did not count towards the ten labours set for him.\nEurystheus' third task did not involve killing a beast, but capturing one alive\u2014the Ceryneian Hind, a golden-horned hind or doe sacred to Artemis. Heracles knew that he had to return the hind, as he had promised, to Artemis, so he agreed to hand it over on the condition that Eurystheus himself come out and take it from him. Eurystheus did come out, but the moment Heracles let the hind go, she sprinted back to her mistress, and Heracles departed, saying that Eurystheus had not been quick enough.\nWhen Heracles returned with the Erymanthian Boar, Eurystheus was again frightened and hid in his jar, begging Heracles to get rid of the beast; Heracles obliged.\nThe fifth labour proposed by Eurystheus was to clear out the numerous stables of Augeias. Striking a deal with Augeias, Heracles proposed a payment of a tenth of Augeias' cattle if the labour was completed successfully. Not believing the task feasible, Augeias agreed, asking his son Phyleus to witness.\nHeracles rerouted two nearby rivers (Alpheis and Peneios) through the stable, clearing out the dung rapidly. When Augeias learned of Heracles' bargain for the task, he refused payment. Heracles brought the case to court, and Phyleus testified against his father. Enraged, Augeias banished both Phyleus and Heracles from the land before the court had cast their vote. However, Eurystheus refused to credit the labour to Heracles, as he had performed it for payment. So Heracles went and drove Augeias out of the kingdom and installed Phyleus as king. Heracles then took his tenth of the cattle and left them to graze in a field by his home.\nFor his sixth labour, Heracles had to drive the Stymphalian Birds off the marshes they plagued. He did so, shooting down several birds with his Hydra-poisoned arrows and bringing them back to Eurystheus as proof.\nFor his seventh labour, Heracles captured the Cretan Bull. He used a lasso and rode it back to his cousin. Eurystheus offered to sacrifice the bull to Hera his patron, who hated Heracles. She refused the sacrifice because it reflected glory on Heracles. The bull was released and wandered to Marathon, becoming known as the Marathonian Bull.\nWhen Heracles brought back the man-eating Mares of Diomedes successfully, Eurystheus dedicated the horses to Hera and allowed them to roam freely in the Argolid. Bucephalus, Alexander the Great's horse, was said to be descended from these mares.\nTo acquire the belt of Hippolyte, queen of the Amazons, was Heracles' ninth task. This task was at the request of Eurystheus' daughter, Admete. For the tenth labour, he stole the cattle of the giant Geryon, which Eurystheus then sacrificed to Hera.\nTo extend what may have once been ten Labours to the canonical dozen, it was said that Eurystheus didn't count the Hydra, as he was assisted, nor the Augean stables, as Heracles received payment for his work. For the eleventh labour, Heracles had to obtain the Apples of the Hesperides; he convinced their father, the Titan Atlas, to help him, but did his share of work by temporarily holding up the sky in the Titan's stead. For his final labour, he was to capture Cerberus, the three-headed hound that guarded the entrance to Hades. When he managed to bring the struggling animal back, the terrified Eurystheus hid in his jar one more time, begging Heracles to leave for good and take the dog with him.\nDeath.\nAfter Heracles died, Eurystheus remained bitter over the indignity the hero had caused him. He attempted to destroy Heracles' many children (the Heracleidae, led by Hyllus), who fled to Athens. He attacked the city but was soundly defeated, and Eurystheus and his sons were killed. Though it is widely told that Hyllus killed Eurystheus, the stories about the killer of Eurystheus and the fate of his corpse vary, but the Athenians believed the burial site of Eurystheus remained on their soil and served to protect the country against the descendants of Heracles, who traditionally included the Spartans and Argives.\nAfter Eurystheus' death, the brothers Atreus and Thyestes, whom he had left in charge during his absence, took over the city, the former exiling the latter and assuming the kingship, while Tiryns returned to the kingship of Argos.\nEurystheus in Euripides.\nEurystheus was a character in \"Heracleidae\", a play by Euripides. Macaria, one of the daughters of Heracles, and her brothers and sisters hid from Eurystheus in Athens, which was ruled by King Demophon. As Eurystheus prepared to attack, an oracle told Demophon that he would win if and only if a noble woman was sacrificed to Persephone. Macaria volunteered for the sacrifice and a spring was named the Macarian spring in her honor. Eurystheus speaks prophetically of his burial within Attica, claiming that he will be an anti-hero of sorts, though one who will eventually protect the Athenians."}
{"id": "10165", "revid": "17258522", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10165", "title": "Effects unit", "text": "An effects unit, effects processor, or effects pedal is an electronic device that alters the sound of a musical instrument or other audio source through audio signal processing.\nCommon effects include distortion/overdrive, often used with electric guitar in electric blues and rock music; dynamic effects such as volume pedals and compressors, which affect loudness; filters such as wah-wah pedals and graphic equalizers, which modify frequency ranges; modulation effects, such as chorus, flangers and phasers; pitch effects such as pitch shifters; and time effects, such as reverb and delay, which create echoing sounds and emulate the sound of different spaces.\nMost modern effects use solid-state electronics or digital signal processors. Some effects, particularly older ones such as Leslie speakers and spring reverbs, use mechanical components or vacuum tubes. Effects are often used as stompboxes, typically placed on the floor and controlled with footswitches. They may also be built into guitar amplifiers, instruments (such as the Hammond B-3 organ), tabletop units designed for DJs and record producers, and rackmounts, and are widely used as audio plug-ins in such common formats as VST, AAX, and AU.\nMusicians, audio engineers and record producers use effects units during live performances or in the studio, typically with electric guitar, bass guitar, electronic keyboard or electric piano. While effects are most frequently used with electric or electronic instruments, they can be used with any audio source, such as acoustic instruments, drums, and vocals.\nTerminology.\nAn effects unit is also called an \"effect box\", \"effects device\", \"effects processor\" or simply an \"effect\". The abbreviation \"F/X\" or \"FX\" is sometimes used. A pedal-style unit may be called a \"stomp box\", \"stompbox\", \"effects pedal\" or \"pedal\". Unprocessed audio coming into an effects unit is referred to as \"dry\", while the processed audio output is referred to as \"wet\".\nA musician bringing many pedals to a live show or recording session often mounts the pedals on a guitar pedalboard, to reduce set-up and tear-down time and, for pedalboards with lids, protect the pedals during transportation. When a musician has multiple effects in a rack mounted road case, this case may be called an \"effects rack\" or \"rig\". When rackmounted effects are mounted in a roadcase, this also speeds up a musician's set-up and tear-down time, because all of the effects can be connected together inside the rack case.\nForm factors.\nEffects units are available in a variety of form factors. Stompboxes are used in both live performance and studio recording. Rackmount devices saw a heavy usage during the later 20th century, due to their superior processing power and desirable tones as compared to pedal-style units. However, by the 21st century, with the advent of digital plugins and more powerful stompboxes for live usage, the use of rack-mounted effect units has declined. An effects unit can consist of analog or digital electronics or a combination of the two. During a live performance, the effect is plugged into the electrical \"signal\" path of the instrument. In the studio, an instrument or another sound source \u2014 possibly an auxiliary output of a mixer or a DAW \u2014 is patched into the effect. Whatever the form factor, effects units are part of a studio or musician's outboard gear.\nStompboxes.\nStompboxes are small plastic or metal chassis that usually lie on the floor or in a pedalboard to be operated by the user's feet. Pedals are often rectangle-shaped, but there are a range of other shapes (e.g., the circular Fuzz Face). Typical simple stompboxes have a single footswitch, one to three potentiometers for controlling the effect, and a single LED that indicates if the effect is on. A typical distortion or overdrive pedal's three potentiometers, for example, control the level or intensity of the distortion effect, the tone of the effected signal and the output level of the effected signal. Depending on the type of pedal, the potentiometers may control different parameters of the effect. For a chorus effect, for example, the knobs may control the depth and speed of the effect. Complex stompboxes may have multiple footswitches, many knobs, additional switches or buttons that are operated with the fingers, and an alphanumeric LED display that indicates the status of the effect with short acronyms (e.g., DIST for \"distortion\").\nAn is formed by connecting two or more stompboxes forming a signal chain. Effect chains are typically created between the guitar and the amp or between the preamplifier and the power amp. When a pedal is off or inactive, the electric audio signal coming into the pedal diverts onto a \"bypass\", an unaltered \"dry\" signal that continues on to other effects down the chain. In this way, a musician can combine effects within a chain in a variety of ways without having to reconnect boxes during a performance.\nA \"controller\" or \"effects management system\" lets the musician create multiple effect chains, so they can select one or several chains by tapping a single switch. The switches are usually organized in a row or a simple grid.\nIt is common to put compression, wah and overdrive pedals at the start of the chain; modulation (chorus, flanger, phase shifter) in the middle; and time-based units (delay/echo, reverb at the end. When using many effects, unwanted noise and hum can be introduced into the sound. Some performers use a noise gate pedal at the end of a chain to reduce unwanted noise and hum introduced by overdrive units or vintage gear.\nRackmounts.\nRackmount effects units are typically built in a thin metal chassis with \"rack ears\" designed to be screw-mounted into the rack rails of a 19-inch rack that is standard to the music technology industry. Rackmount effects have a standardized 19-inch width, and height of 1 or more rack unit(s). Devices that are less than 19 inches wide can sometimes be made rackmount-compatible via special rackmount adapters.\nA rackmount effects unit may contain electronic circuitry identical to a stompbox's, although its circuits are typically more complex. Unlike stompboxes, rackmounts usually have several different types of effects. Rackmount effects units are controlled by knobs, switches or buttons on their front panel, and often remote-controllable by a MIDI digital control interface or pedal-style \"foot controller\".\nRackmount effects units are most commonly used in recording studios and front of house live sound mixing situations. Musicians may use them in place of stompboxes, as use of a rack can offer space for conveniently mounting additional rackmount equipment or accessories. Rackmounted effects units are typically mounted in a rack, which may be housed within a road case, a durable case with removable access panels that protect the equipment within during transportation. Because of this, rackmount effect units are not always designed with durable protective features such as corner protectors which are used on stompboxes and amps that are designed to be transported as standalone units.\nMulti-effects and tabletop units.\nA multi-effects (MFX) device is a single electronics effects pedal or rackmount device that contains many different electronic effects. multi-effects devices allow users to \"preset\" combinations of different effects, allowing musicians quick on-stage access to different effects combinations. Multi-effects units typically have a range of distortion, chorus, flanger, phaser, delay, looper and reverb effects. Pedal-style multi-effects range from fairly inexpensive stompboxes that contain two pedals and a few knobs to control the effects to large, expensive floor units with many pedals and knobs. Rack-mounted multi-effects units may be mounted in the same rack as preamplifiers and power amplifiers.\nA tabletop unit is a type of multi-effects device that sits on a desk and is controlled manually. One such example is the Pod guitar amplifier modeler. Digital effects designed for DJs are often sold in tabletop models, so that the units can be placed alongside a DJ mixer, turntables and scratching gear.\nBuilt-in units.\nEffects are often incorporated into instrument amplifiers and even some types of instruments. Electric guitar amplifiers often have built-in reverb, chorus and distortion, while acoustic guitar and keyboard amplifiers tend to only have built-in reverb. Some acoustic instrument amplifiers have reverb, chorus, compression and equalization (bass and treble) effects. Vintage guitar amps typically have tremolo and vibrato effects, and sometimes reverb. The Fender Bandmaster Reverb amp, for example, had built-in reverb and vibrato. Built-in effects may offer the user less control than standalone pedals or rackmounted units. For example, on some lower- to mid-priced bass amplifiers, the only control on the audio compression effect is a button or switch to turn it on or off, or a single knob. In contrast, a pedal or rackmounted unit would typically provide ratio, threshold and attack controls or other options to allow the user additional control over the compression.\nSome guitar amplifiers have built-in multi-effects units or digital amplifier modeling effects. Bass amplifiers are less likely to have built-in effects, although some may have a compressor/limiter or fuzz bass effect.\nInstruments with built-in effects include Hammond organs, electronic organs, electronic pianos and digital synthesizers. Built-in effects for keyboards typically include reverb, chorus and, for Hammond organ, vibrato. Many clonewheel organs include an overdrive effect. Occasionally, acoustic-electric and electric guitars will have built-in effects, such as a preamp or equalizer.\nHistory.\nStudio effects and early stand-alone units.\nThe earliest sound effects were strictly used in studio productions. Microphones placed in echo chambers with specially designed acoustic properties simulated the sound of live performances in different environments. In the mid to late 1940s, recording engineers and experimental musicians such as Les Paul began manipulating reel-to-reel recording tape to create echo effects and unusual, futuristic sounds. In 1941, DeArmond released the Model 601 Tremolo Control, the first commercially available stand-alone effects unit. This device produced a tremolo by passing an instrument's electrical signal through a water-based electrolytic fluid. Most stand-alone effects of the 1950s and early 1960s such as the Gibson GA-VI vibrato unit and the Fender reverb box, were expensive and impractical, requiring bulky transformers and high voltages. The original stand-alone units were not especially in-demand as many effects came built into amplifiers. The first popular stand-alone was the 1958 Watkins Copicat, a relatively portable tape echo effect made famous by the British band, The Shadows.\nAmplifiers.\nEffects built into tube-powered guitar amplifiers were the first effects that musicians used regularly outside the studio. From the late 1940s onward, the Gibson began including vibrato circuits in combo amplifiers that incorporated one or more speakers with the amp. The 1950 Ray Butts EchoSonic amp was the first to feature a tape echo, which quickly became popular with guitarists such as Chet Atkins, Carl Perkins, Scotty Moore, Luther Perkins, and Roy Orbison. Both Premier and Gibson built amplifiers with spring reverb. Fender began manufacturing the tremolo amps Tremolux in 1955 and Vibrolux in 1956.\nDistortion was not an effect originally intended by amplifier manufacturers, but could often easily be achieved by \"overdriving\" the power supply in early tube amplifiers. In the 1950s, guitarists began deliberately increasing gain beyond its intended levels to achieve \"warm\" distorted sounds. Among the first musicians to experiment with distortion were Willie Johnson of Howlin' Wolf, Goree Carter, Joe Hill Louis, Ike Turner, Guitar Slim, and Chuck Berry.\nIn 1954, Pat Hare produced heavily distorted power chords for several recordings (including James Cotton's \"Cotton Crop Blues\"), creating \"a grittier, nastier, more ferocious electric guitar sound,\" accomplished by turning the volume knob on his amplifier \"all the way to the right until the speaker was screaming.\" Link Wray's 1958 recording \"Rumble\" inspired young musicians such as Pete Townshend of The Who, Jimmy Page of Led Zeppelin, Jeff Beck, Dave Davies of The Kinks, and Neil Young to explore distortion by various means. In 1966, the British company Marshall Amplification began producing the Marshall 1963, a guitar amplifier capable of producing the distorted \"crunch\" that rock musicians were starting to seek.\nStompboxes.\nThe electronic transistor finally made it possible to fit effects circuitry into highly portable stompbox units. Transistors replaced vacuum tubes, allowing for much more compact formats and greater stability. The first transistorized guitar effect was the 1962 Maestro Fuzz Tone pedal, which became a sensation after its use in the 1965 Rolling Stones hit \"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction\".\nWarwick Electronics manufactured the first wah-wah pedal, The Clyde McCoy, in 1967 and that same year Roger Mayer developed the first octave effect, which Jimi Hendrix named \"Octavio\". Upon first hearing the Octavia, Hendrix reportedly rushed back to the studio and immediately used it to record the guitar solos on \"Purple Haze\" and \"Fire\". In 1968, Univox began marketing Shin-ei's Uni-Vibe pedal, an effect designed by noted audio engineer Fumio Mieda that mimicked the odd phase shift and chorus effects of the Leslie rotating speakers used in Hammond organs. The pedals soon became favorite effects of guitarists Jimi Hendrix and Robin Trower. In 1976, Roland subsidiary Boss Corporation released the CE-1 Chorus Ensemble, the first chorus pedal, created by taking a chorus circuit from an amplifier and putting it into a stompbox. By the mid-1970s a variety of solid-state effects pedals including flangers, chorus pedals, ring modulators and phase shifters were available.\nIn the 1980s, digital rackmount units began replacing stompboxes as the effects format of choice. Often musicians would record \"dry\", unaltered tracks in the studio and effects would be added in post-production. The success of Nirvana's 1991 album \"Nevermind\" helped to re-ignite interest in stompboxes. Some grunge guitarists would chain several fuzz pedals together and plug them into a tube amplifier. Throughout the 1990s, musicians committed to a lo-fi aesthetic such as J Mascis of Dinosaur Jr., Stephen Malkmus of Pavement and Robert Pollard of Guided by Voices continued to use analog effects pedals.\nEffects and effects units\u2014stompboxes in particular\u2014have been celebrated by pop and rock musicians in album titles, songs and band names. The Big Muff, a fuzzbox manufactured by Electro-Harmonix, is commemorated by the Depeche Mode song \"Big Muff\" and the Mudhoney EP \"Superfuzz Bigmuff\". Nine Inch Nails, Pink Floyd, George Harrison, They Might Be Giants and Joy Division are among the many musicians who have referenced effects units in their music.\nTechniques.\nDistortion.\nDistortion, overdrive, and fuzz effects units add a \"warm\", \"gritty\", or \"fuzzy\" character to an audio signal by re-shaping or clipping it, which distorts the shape of its waveform by flattening its peaks, creating \"warm\" sounds by adding harmonics or \"gritty\" sounds by adding inharmonic overtones. Distortion effects are sometimes called gain effects, as distorted guitar sounds were first achieved by increasing the gain of tube amplifiers.\nWhile distortion effects units produce perfectly flattened peaks or \"hard\" clipping, overdrive effects units produce \"soft\" tube-like distortion by compressing the waveform without completely flattening it. Much like guitar tube amplifiers, overdrive effects units are capable of producing \"clean\" sounds at lower volumes and distorted \"warm\" sounds at higher volumes.\nNotable examples of distortion and overdrive pedals include the Boss DS-1 Distortion, Ibanez Tube Screamer, Marshall ShredMaster, MXR Distortion +, and Pro Co RAT.\nA fuzz pedal, or fuzzbox, is a type of overdrive effects unit that clips a signal until it is nearly a squarewave, resulting in a heavily distorted or \"fuzzy\" sound. Fuzzboxes may contain frequency multiplier circuitry to achieve a harsh timbre by adding complex harmonics. The Rolling Stones' song \"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction\", with a fuzz effect featured prominently on the main electric guitar riff played by Keith Richards, greatly popularized the use of fuzz effects. Fuzz bass (also called bass overdrive) is a style of playing the electric bass that produces a buzzy, overdriven sound via a tube or transistor amp or by using a fuzz or overdrive pedal.\nNotable examples of fuzz effect units include the: Arbiter Fuzz Face, Electro-Harmonix Big Muff, Shin-ei Companion FY-2, Univox Super-Fuzz, Vox Tone Bender, Z.Vex Fuzz Factory.\nWhile distortion effect units are most associated with electric and bass guitar, they are also commonly used on keyboard instruments (i.e. synthesizers, combo and tonewheel organs, electric piano), as well as drums and vocals.\nDynamics.\nAlso called volume and amplitude effects, dynamics effects modify the volume of an instrument. Dynamics effects were among the first effects introduced to guitarists.\n\"Boost/volume pedal\": When activated, a \"boost\" or \"clean boost\" pedal amplifies the volume of an instrument by increasing the amplitude of its audio signal. These units are generally used for \"boosting\" volume during solos and preventing signal loss in long effects chains. A guitarist switching from rhythm guitar to lead guitar for a guitar solo may use a boost to increase the volume of their solo.\nVolume effects: Electro-Harmonix LPB-1, Fender Volume Pedal, MXR Micro Amp, Ernie Ball Volume Pedal. Treadle-based volume pedals are used by electric instrument players (guitar, bass, keyboards) to adjust the volume of their instrument with one foot while their hands are being used to play their instrument. Treadle-style volume pedals are often also used to create swelling effects by removing the attack of a note or chord, as popularised by pedal steel guitar players. This enables electric guitar and pedal steel players to imitate the soft swelling sound that an orchestra string section can produce, in which a note or chord starts very softly and then grows in volume. Treadle-based volume pedals do not usually have batteries or require external power.\n\"Compressor\": Compressors make loud sounds quieter and quiet sounds louder by decreasing or \"compressing\" the dynamic range of an audio signal. A compressor is often used to stabilize volume and alter the sound of a note's \"attack\". With extreme settings of its controls, a compressor can function as a limiter.\nCompressor effects: Keeley Compressor, MXR Dyna Comp, Boss CS-3 Compression Sustainer.\n\"Noise gate\": Noise gates attenuate hum, hiss, and static in the signal by greatly diminishing the volume when the signal falls below a set threshold. Noise gates are expanders\u2014meaning that, unlike compressors, they increase the dynamic range of an audio signal to make quiet sounds even quieter. If used with extreme settings and combined with reverb, they can create unusual sounds, such as the gated drum effect used in 1980s pop songs, a style popularized by the Phil Collins song \"In the Air Tonight\".\nNoise gate effects: Boss NS-2 Noise Suppressor.\nFilter.\nFilter effects alter the frequency content of an audio signal that passes through them by either boosting or weakening specific frequencies or frequency regions.\n\"Equalizer\": An equalizer is a set of linear filters that strengthen (\"boost\") or weaken (\"cut\") specific frequency regions. While basic home stereos often have equalizers for two bands, to adjust bass and treble, professional graphic equalizers offer much more targeted control over the audio frequency spectrum. Audio engineers use highly sophisticated equalizers to eliminate unwanted sounds, make an instrument or voice more prominent, and enhance particular aspects of an instrument's tone.\nEqualizer effects: Boss GE-7 Equalizer, MXR 10-band EQ Pedal.\n\"Talk box\": A talk box directs the sound from an electric guitar or synthesizer into the mouth of a performer using a tube, allowing the sound to be shaped into vowels and consonants with movements of the mouth. The modified sound is then picked up by a microphone. In this way, the guitarist is able create the effect that the guitar is talking. Some famous uses of the talkbox include Bon Jovi's \"Livin' on a Prayer\", Stevie Wonder's \"Black Man\", M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's \"Kickstart My Heart\", Joe Walsh's \"Rocky Mountain Way\", Alice in Chains's \"Man in the box\" and Peter Frampton's \"Show Me the Way\".\nTalk boxes: Dunlop HT1 Heil Talk Box, Rocktron Banshee.\n\"Wah-wah\": A wah-wah pedal creates vowel-like sounds by altering the frequency spectrum produced by an instrument\u2014i.e., how loud it is at each separate frequency\u2014in what is known as a spectral glide or \"sweep\". The device is operated by a foot treadle that manipulates a potentiometer or other electronic control. Wah-wah pedals are often used by funk and rock guitarists.\nWah effects: Dunlop Cry Baby, Morley Power Wah, Vox.\n\"Auto-wah\" or, more generally, envelope filter effects: A filter effect that is controlled by the volume of the input signal. The most common filter type used for this effect pedal is the low-pass filter, although many designs include a toggle for band-pass or high-pass filters as well. Additionally, some designs can switch between a down filter mode and an up filter. This effect is commonly used in funk, reggae and jam band music.\nEnvelope filter effects: Musitronics Mu-Tron III, Electro-Harmonix Q-Tron Plus, DOD Envelope Filter 440.\nModulation.\nModulation, in general electronics, means the altering of one signal based on another. In audio effects, modulation is a control feature that varies the strength or other attribute of the effect over time to alter tonal properties. Some modulation effects modulate an instrument's audio signal with a signal generated by the effect called a carrier wave. Other modulation effects split an instrument's audio signal in two, altering one portion of the signal and mixing it with the unaltered portion.\n\"Chorus\": Chorus pedals mimic the effect choirs and string orchestras produce naturally, by mixing similar sounds with slight differences in timbre and pitch. A chorus effect splits the audio signal and adds a slight delay and frequency variations or \"vibrato\" to one version while leaving the rest unaltered. A well-known usage of chorus is the lead guitar in \"Come As You Are\" by Nirvana.\nChorus effects: Boss CE-1 Chorus Ensemble, Electro-Harmonix Small Clone, TC Electronic Stereo Chorus.\n\"Flanger\": A flanger creates a \"whooshing\", \"jet plane\" or \"spaceship\" sound, simulating a studio effect that was first produced by recording a track on two synchronized tape decks and periodically slowing one tape by pressing the edge of its reel (the \"flange\"). When the two tapes' audio signals are later mixed, a comb filter effect can be heard. Flanger units add a variably delayed version of the audio signal to the original or signal, creating a comb filter or Doppler effect. Some famous uses of flanger effects include \"Walking on the Moon\" by The Police, the intro to \"Ain't Talkin' 'Bout Love\" by Van Halen, and \"Barracuda\" by Heart.\nFlanger effects: Electro-Harmonix Electric Mistress, MXR Flanger, Boss BF-3 Flanger.\n\"Phaser\": A phaser or phase shifter creates a slight rippling effect\u2014amplifying some aspects of the tone while diminishing others\u2014by splitting an audio signal in two and altering the phase of one portion. Three well-known examples of phaser are the two-handed tapping part on the Van Halen instrumental \"Eruption\" and the keyboard parts on Billy Joel's \"Just the Way You Are\" and Paul Simon's \"Slip Slidin' Away\".\nPhase shift effects: Uni-Vibe, Electro-Harmonix Small Stone, MXR Phase 90.\n\"Ring modulator\": A ring modulator produces a resonant, metallic sound by frequency mixing an instrument's audio signal with a carrier wave generated by the device's internal oscillator. The original sound wave is suppressed and replaced by a \"ring\" of inharmonic higher and lower pitches or sidebands. A notable use of ring modulation is the guitar in the Black Sabbath song \"Paranoid\".\nRing modulator effects: Moogerfooger MF-102 Ring Modulator.\n\"Tremolo\": A tremolo effect produces a variation in the volume of a signal. The tremolo effect should not be confused with the misleadingly-named tremolo bar, a device on a guitar bridge that creates a vibrato or pitch-bending effect. In electronic effects, a tremolo is produced by modulating an instrument's audio signal with a sub-audible carrier wave in such a way that generates amplitude variations in the sound wave. Tremolo effects are built-in effects in some vintage guitar amplifiers. The guitar intro in the Rolling Stones' \"Gimme Shelter\" features a tremolo effect.\nTremolo effects: Demeter TRM-1 Tremulator, Fender Tremolux.\n\"Slicer\": Combines a modulation sequence with a noise gate or envelope filter to create a percussive and rhythmic effect like a helicopter.\n\"Vibrato\": Vibrato effects produce slight, rapid variations in pitch, mimicking the fractional semitone variations produced naturally by opera singers and violinists when they are prolonging a single note. Vibrato effects often allow the performer to control the rate of the variation as well as the difference in pitch (\"depth\"). A vibrato with an extreme \"depth\" setting (e.g., half a semitone or more) will produce a dramatic, ululating sound. In transistorized effects, vibrato is produced by mixing an instrument's audio signal with a carrier wave in such a way that generates frequency variations in the sound wave. Guitarists often use the terms \"vibrato\" and \"tremolo\" misleadingly. A so-called \"vibrato unit\" in a guitar amplifier may actually produces tremolo, while a \"tremolo arm\" or \"whammy bar\" on a guitar produces vibrato.\nVibrato effects: Boss VB-2 Vibrato.\nPitch and frequency.\nA pitch shifter (also called an \"octaver\" for effects that shift pitch by an octave) raises or lowers (e.g. \"transposes\") each note a performer plays by a pre-set interval. For example, a pitch shifter set to increase the pitch by a fourth will raise each note four diatonic intervals above the notes actually played. Simple, less expensive pitch shifters raise or lower the pitch by one or two octaves, while more sophisticated and expensive devices offer a range of interval alterations. A pitch shifter can be used by an electric guitarist to play notes that would normally only be available on an electric bass. As well, a bass player with a four string electric bass can use an octave pedal to obtain low notes that would normally only be obtainable with a five-string bass with a low \"B\" string.\nA harmonizer is a type of sophisticated pitch shifter that combines the altered pitch with the original pitch to create a two note harmony based on the original pitch, or even with some pedals, three note harmony. Some hamonizers are able to create chorus-like effects by adding very tiny shifts in pitch.\nThe first mass-market digital pitch shifter was the DigiTech Whammy, introduced in 1989. It creates a \"strange and artificial\" sound, with distinctive \"wobbly\" artifacts. Its users include Jonny Greenwood and Ed O'Brien of Radiohead, Matt Bellamy of Muse, Tom Morello of Rage Against the Machine and Audioslave, David Gilmour of Pink Floyd and Jack White of the White Stripes. \"Guitar World\" described the Whammy as one of the most iconic guitar pedals.\nTime-based.\nTime-based effects delay the sound signal, add reverb or echos, or, if a long delay is possible, enable musicians to record \"loops\".\n\"Delay/echo\": Delay/echo units produce an echo effect by adding a duplicate instrument-to-amplifier electrical signal to the original signal at a slight time-delay. The effect can either be a single echo called a \"slap\" or \"slapback\", or multiple echos. A well-known use of delay is the lead guitar in the U2 song \"Where the Streets Have No Name\", and also the opening riff of \"Welcome to the Jungle\" by Guns N' Roses.\nDelay effects: Boss DD-3 Digital Delay, MXR Carbon Copy, Electro-Harmonix Deluxe Memory Man, Line 6 DL4, Roland RE-201.\n\"Looper pedal\": A looper pedal or \"phrase looper\" allows a performer to record and later replay a phrase, riff or passage from a song. Loops can be created on the spot during a performance (live looping) or they can be pre-recorded. By using a looper pedal, a singer-guitarist in a one person band can play the backing chords (or riffs) to a song, loop them with the pedal, and then sing and do a guitar solo over the chords. Some units allow a performer to layer multiple loops, enabling the performer to create the effect of a full band. The first loop effects were created with reel-to-reel tape using a tape loop. High-end boutique tape loop effects are still used by some studio producers who want a vintage sound. Digital loop effects recreate this effect using an electronic memory.\n\"Reverb\": Reverb units simulate the spacious sounds produced naturally in a huge stone cathedral (or other acoustic space such as a hall or room). This is done by creating a large number of echoes that gradually fade away in volume or \"decay\". One early technique for creating a reverb effect was to send an amplified signal of the music via a speaker to another room with reflective surfaces, such as a tile bathroom, and then record the natural reverberations that were produced. A plate reverb system uses an electromechanical transducer to create vibrations in a plate of metal. Spring reverb systems, which are often used in guitar amplifiers, use a transducer to create vibrations in a spring. Digital reverb effects use various signal processing algorithms to create the reverb effect, often by using multiple feedback delay circuits. Rockabilly and surf guitar are two genres that make heavy use of reverb.\nReverb effects: Electro-Harmonix Holy Grail, Fender Reverb Unit.\nFeedback/sustain.\n\"Audio feedback\": Audio feedback is an effect produced when amplified sound is picked up by a microphone or guitar pickup and played back through a guitar amplifier, initiating a \"feedback loop\", which usually consists of high-pitched sound. Feedback that occurs from a vocal mic into a PA system is almost always avoided. However, in some styles of rock music, electric guitar players intentionally create feedback by playing their instrument directly in front of a heavily amplified, distorted guitar amplifier's speaker enclosure. The creative use of feedback effects was pioneered by guitarists such as Jimi Hendrix in the 1960s. This technique creates sustained, high-pitched overtones and unusual sounds not possible through regular playing techniques. Guitar feedback effects can be difficult to perform, because it is difficult to determine the sound volume and guitar position relative to a guitar amp's loudspeaker necessary for achieving the desired feedback sound. Guitar feedback effects are used in a number of rock genres, including psychedelic rock, heavy metal music and punk rock.\nEBow is a brand name of Heet Sound Products, of Los Angeles, California, for a small, handheld, battery-powered resonator. The Ebow was invented by Greg Heet, as a way to make a note on an electric guitar string resonate continuously, creating an effect that sounds similar to a bowed violin note or a sustained pipe organ note. The resonator uses a pickup \u2013 inductive string driver \u2013 feedback circuit, including a sensor coil, driver coil, and amplifier, to induce forced string resonance. The Ebow brand resonator is monophonic, and drives only one string at a time.\nOther handheld and mounted guitar and bass resonators have been on the market since the early 1990s, produced in Germany under the SRG brand, which ceased production in 2016, and were available in both monophonic (one string at a time) and polyphonic (multiple strings at a time) models, which included multiple onboard trigger switch effects, such as HPF (high pass filter) for enhancing harmonics and producing feedback effects, and LPF (low pass filter), producing a bass boost with a cello sound on heavy gauge strings. Later EBow models, such as the plus Ebow, contain a mode slide switch on the back, which allows the player to either produce just sustain or overtone feedback in addition to sustain. Pedals such as the Boss DF-2 and FB-2 use an internally generated signal matched to the pitch of the guitar that can be sustained indefinitely by depressing the pedal. Many compressor pedals are often also marketed as \"sustainer pedals\". As a note is sustained, it loses energy and volume due to diminishing vibration in the string. The compressor pedal boosts its electrical signal to the specified dynamic range, slightly prolonging the duration of the note. This, combined with heavy distortion and the close proximity of the guitar and the speaker cabinet, can lead to infinite sustain at higher volumes.\nOther effects.\n\"Envelope follower\": An envelope follower activates an effect once a designated volume is reached. One effect that uses an envelope follower is the \"auto-wah\", which produces a \"wah\" effect depending on how loud or soft the notes are being played.\n\"Guitar amplifier modeling\": Amplifier modeling is a digital effect that replicates the sound of various amplifiers, most often vintage tube amplifiers and famous brands of speaker cabinets (e.g., the Ampeg SVT 8x10\" bass cabinet). Sophisticated modeling effects can simulate different types of speaker cabinets (e.g., the sound of an 8x10\" cabinet) and miking techniques. A rotary speaker simulator mimics the doppler and chorus effect sound of a vintage Leslie speaker system by replicating its volume and pitch modulations, overdrive capacity and phase shifts.\n\"Pitch correction/vocal effects\": Pitch correction effects use signal-processing algorithms to re-tune faulty intonation in a vocalist's performance or create unusual vocoder-type vocal effects. One of the best known examples of this is Autotune, a software program and effect unit which can be used to both correct pitch (it moves a pitch to the nearest semitone), and add vocal effects. Some stompbox-style vocal pedals contain multiple effects, such as reverb and pitch correction.\n\"Simulators\": Simulators enable electric guitars to mimic the sound of other instruments such as acoustic guitar, electric bass and sitar. Pick up simulators used on guitars with single-coil pick ups replicate the sound of guitars with humbucker pick ups, or vice versa. A de-fretter is a bass guitar effect that simulates the sound of a fretless bass. The effect uses an envelope-controlled filter and voltage-controlled amplifier to \"soften\" a note's attack both in volume and timbre.\n\"Bitcrusher filters\": Bitcrushers rely on conversion of the audio signal into a digital format (ADC) and the reduction of sound fidelity by utilising bit (and sometimes sample) rates low enough to cause significant colouration and filtering within the audible frequency range.\n\"Rotary speakers\" are specially constructed amplifier and loudspeakers used to create special audio effects by rotating the speakers or a sound-directing duct\nto introduce the Doppler effect and other sound reflections. The rotating speaker baffle creates a chorus-type effect. Named after its inventor, Donald Leslie, it is particularly associated with the Hammond organ but is used with a variety of instruments as well as vocals. The Hammond/Leslie combination has become an element in many genres of music. The Leslie Speaker and the Hammond Organ brands are currently owned by Suzuki Musical Instrument Corporation.\nThe \"Korg Kaoss Pad\" is a small touchpad MIDI controller, sampler, and effects processor for audio and musical instruments, made by Korg. The Kaoss Pad's touchpad can be used to control its internal effects engine, which can be applied to a line-in signal or to samples recorded from the line-in. Effects types include pitch shifting, distortion, filtering, wah-wah, tremolo, flanging, delay, reverberation, auto-panning, gating, phasing, and ring modulation.\nThe Kaoss Pad can also be used as a MIDI controller.\nBass effects.\nBass effects are electronic effects units that are designed for use with the low pitches created by an electric bass or for an upright bass used with a bass amp or PA system. Two examples of bass effects are fuzz bass and bass chorus. Some bass amplifiers have built-in effects, such as overdrive or chorus. Upright bassists in jazz, folk, blues and similar genres may use a bass preamplifier, a small electronic device that matches the impedance between the piezoelectric pickup and the amp or PA system. Bass preamps also allow for the gain of the signal to be boosted or cut. Some models also offer equalization controls, a compressor, and a DI box connection.\nBoutique pedals.\nBoutique pedals are designed by smaller, independent companies and are typically produced in limited quantities. Some may even be hand-made, with hand-soldered connections. These pedals are mainly distributed online or through mail-order, or sold in a few music stores. They are often more expensive than mass-produced pedals and offer higher-quality components, innovative designs, in-house-made knobs, and hand-painted artwork or etching. Some boutique companies focus on re-creating classic or vintage effects.\nSome boutique pedal manufacturers include: BJFE, Pete Cornish, Emlyn Crowther, Death By Audio, Robert Keeley, Roger Linn, Roger Mayer, Strymon, T-Rex Engineering, ToadWorks, and Z.Vex Effects.\nModification.\nThere is also a niche market for modifying or \"modding\" effects. Typically, vendors provide either custom modification services or sell new effects pedals they have already modified. The Ibanez Tube Screamer, Boss DS-1, Pro Co RAT and DigiTech Whammy are some of the most often-modified effects. Common modifications include value changes in capacitors or resistors, adding true-bypass so that the effect's circuitry is no longer in the signal path, substituting higher-quality components, replacing the unit's original operational amplifiers (op-amps), or adding functions to the device, such as allowing additional control of some factor or adding another output jack.\nOther pedals and rackmount units.\nNot all stompboxes and rackmounted electronic devices designed for musicians are effects. Strobe tuner and regular electronic tuner pedals indicate whether a guitar string is too sharp or flat. Stompbox-format tuner pedals route the electric signal for the instrument through the unit via a 1/4\" patch cable. These pedal-style tuners usually have an output so that the signal can be plugged into a guitar amp to produce sound. Rackmount power conditioner devices deliver a voltage of the proper level and characteristics to enable equipment to function properly (e.g., by providing transient impulse protection). A rackmounted wireless receiver unit is used to enable a guitarist or bassist to move around on stage without being connected to a cable. A footswitch pedal such as the \"A/B\" pedal routes a guitar signal to an amplifier or enables a performer to switch between two guitars, or between two amplifiers.\nGuitar amplifiers and electronic keyboards may have switch pedals for turning built-in reverb and distortion effects on and off; the pedals contain only a switch, with the circuitry for the effect being housed in the amplifier chassis. Some musicians who use rackmounted effects or laptops employ a MIDI controller pedalboard or armband remote controls to trigger sound samples, switch between different effects or control effect settings. A pedal keyboard uses pedals, but it is not an effect unit; it is a foot-operated keyboard in which the pedals are typically used to play basslines."}
{"id": "10166", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10166", "title": "Enron", "text": "Enron Corporation was an American energy, commodities, and services company based in Houston, Texas. It was founded by Kenneth Lay in 1985 as a merger between Lay's Houston Natural Gas and InterNorth, both relatively small regional companies at the time of the merger. Before its bankruptcy on December 2, 2001, Enron employed approximately 20,600 staff and was a major electricity, natural gas, communications, and pulp and paper company, with claimed revenues of nearly $101\u00a0billion during 2000. \"Fortune\" named Enron \"America's Most Innovative Company\" for six consecutive years.\nAt the end of 2001, it was revealed that Enron's reported financial condition was sustained by an institutionalized, systematic, and creatively planned accounting fraud, known since as the Enron scandal. Enron became synonymous with willful, institutional fraud and systemic corruption. The scandal brought into question the accounting practices and activities of many corporations in the United States and was a factor in the enactment of the Sarbanes\u2013Oxley Act of 2002. It affected the greater business world by causing, together with the even larger fraudulent bankruptcy of WorldCom, the dissolution of the Arthur Andersen accounting firm, which had been Enron and WorldCom's main auditor, and coconspirator in the fraud for years.\nEnron filed for bankruptcy in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York in late 2001 and selected Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges as its bankruptcy counsel. Enron emerged from bankruptcy in November 2004, under a court-approved plan of reorganization. A new board of directors changed its name to Enron Creditors Recovery Corp., and emphasized reorganizing and liquidating certain operations and assets of the pre-bankruptcy Enron. On September 7, 2006, Enron sold its last remaining subsidiary, Prisma Energy International, to Ashmore Energy International Ltd. (now AEI). It is the largest bankruptcy due specifically to fraud in United States history.\nOn December 2, 2024, the Enron web site relaunched as satire, with Connor Gaydos as CEO, cofounder of Birds Aren't Real.\nHistory.\nPre-merger origins (1925\u20131985).\nInterNorth.\nOne of Enron's primary predecessors was InterNorth, which was formed in 1930, in Omaha, Nebraska, just a few months after Black Tuesday. The low cost of natural gas and the cheap supply of labor during the Great Depression helped to fuel the company's early beginnings, doubling in size by 1932. Over the next 50 years, Northern expanded even more as it acquired many energy companies. It was reorganized in 1979 as the main subsidiary of a holding company, InterNorth, a diversified energy and energy-related products firm. Although most of the acquisitions conducted were successful, some ended poorly. InterNorth competed with Cooper Industries unsuccessfully over a hostile takeover of Crouse-Hinds Company, an electrical products manufacturer. Cooper and InterNorth feuded in numerous suits during the takeover that were eventually settled after the transaction was completed. The subsidiary Northern Natural Gas operated the largest pipeline company in North America. By the 1980s, InterNorth became a major force for natural gas production, transmission, and marketing as well as for natural gas liquids, and was an innovator in the plastics industry. In 1983, InterNorth merged with the Belco Petroleum Company, a Fortune 500 oil exploration and development company founded by Arthur Belfer.\nHouston Natural Gas.\nThe Houston Natural Gas (HNG) corporation was initially formed from the Houston Oil Co. in 1925 to provide gas to customers in the Houston market through the building of gas pipelines. Under the leadership of CEO Robert Herring from 1967 to 1981, the company took advantage of the unregulated Texas natural gas market and the commodity surge in the early 1970s to become a dominant force in the energy industry. Toward the end of the 1970s, HNG's luck began to run out with rising gas prices forcing clients to switch to oil. In addition, with the passing of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, the Texas market was less profitable and as a result, HNG's profits fell. After Herring died in 1981, M.D. Matthews briefly took over as CEO in a 3-year stint with initial success, but ultimately, a big dip in earnings led to his exit. In 1984, Kenneth Lay succeeded Matthews and inherited the troubled conglomerate.\nMerger.\nWith its conservative success, InterNorth became a target of corporate takeovers, the most prominent originating with Irwin Jacobs. InterNorth CEO Sam Segnar sought a friendly merger with HNG. In May 1985, Internorth acquired HNG for $2.3 billion, 40% higher than the current market price, and on July 16, 1985, the two entities voted to merge. The combined assets of the two companies created the second largest gas pipeline system in the US at that time. Internorth's north\u2013south pipelines that served Iowa and Minnesota complemented HNG's Florida and California east-west pipelines well.\nPost-merger rise (1985\u20131991).\nThe company was initially named HNG/InterNorth Inc., even though InterNorth was technically the parent. At the outset, Segnar was CEO but was soon fired by the board of directors to name Lay to the post. Lay moved its headquarters back to Houston and set out to find a new name, spending more than $100,000 in focus groups and consultants in the process. Lippincott &amp; Margulies, the advertising firm responsible for the InterNorth identity five years prior, suggested \"Enteron\". During a meeting with employees on February 14, 1986, Lay announced his interest in this name change, which would be held to a stockholder vote on April 10. Less than a month from this meeting, on March 7, 1986, a spokesman for HNG/InterNorth rescinded the planned Enteron proposal, as since its announcement the name had come under scrutiny for being the same as a medical term for the intestines. This same press release saw the introduction of the Enron name, which would be the new name voted on come April.\nEnron still had some lingering problems left over from its merger, however, the company had to pay Jacobs, who was still a threat, over $350 million and reorganize the company. Lay sold off any parts of the company that he believed didn't belong in the long-term future of Enron. Lay consolidated all the gas pipeline efforts under the Enron Gas Pipeline Operating Company. In addition, it ramped up its electric power and natural gas efforts. In 1988 and 1989, the company added power plants and cogeneration units to its portfolio. In 1989, Jeffrey Skilling, then a consultant at McKinsey &amp; Company, came up with the idea to link natural gas to consumers in more ways, effectively turning natural gas into a commodity. Enron adopted the idea and called it the \"Gas Bank\". The division's success prompted Skilling to join Enron as the head of the Gas Bank in 1991. Another major development inside Enron was a pivot to overseas operations with a $56 million loan in 1989 from the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) for a power plant in Argentina.\n1991\u20132000.\nThroughout the 1990s, Enron made a few changes to its business plan that greatly improved the perceived profitability of the company. First, Enron invested heavily in overseas assets, specifically energy. Another major shift was the gradual transition of focus from a producer of energy to a company that acted more like an investment firm and sometimes a hedge fund, making profits off the margins of the products it traded. These products were traded through the Gas Bank concept, now called the Enron Finance Corp. and headed by Skilling.\nOperations as a trading firm.\nWith the success of the Gas Bank trading natural gas, Skilling looked to expand the horizons of his division, Enron Capital &amp; Trade. Skilling hired Andrew Fastow in 1990 to help.\nEntrance into the retail energy market.\nStarting in 1994 under the Energy Policy Act of 1992, Congress allowed states to deregulate their electricity utilities, allowing them to be opened for competition. California was one such state to do so. Enron, seeing an opportunity with rising prices, was eager to jump into the market. In 1997, Enron acquired Portland General Electric (PGE). Although an Oregon utility, it had the potential to begin serving the massive California market since PGE was a regulated utility. The new Enron division, Enron Energy, ramped up its efforts by offering discounts to potential customers in California starting in 1998. Enron Energy also began to sell natural gas to customers in Ohio and wind power in Iowa. However, the company ended its retail endeavor in 1999 as it was revealed it was costing upwards of $100 million a year.\nData management.\nAs fiber optic technology progressed in the 1990s, multiple companies, including Enron, attempted to make money by \"keeping the continuing network costs low\", which was done by owning their own network. In 1997, FTV Communications LLC, a limited liability company formed by Enron subsidiary FirstPoint Communications, Inc., constructed a fiber optic network between Portland and Las Vegas. In 1998, Enron constructed a building in a rundown area of Las Vegas near E Sahara, right over the \"backbone\" of fiber optic cables providing service to technology companies nationwide. The location had the ability to send \"the entire Library of Congress anywhere in the world within minutes\" and could stream \"video to the whole state of California\". The location was also more protected from natural disasters than areas such as Los Angeles or the East Coast. According to \"Wall Street Daily\", \"Enron had a secret\", it \"wanted to trade bandwidth like it traded oil, gas, electricity, etc. It launched a secret plan to build an enormous amount of fiber optic transmission capacity in Las Vegas\u00a0... it was all part of Enron's plan to essentially own the internet.\" Enron sought to have all US internet service providers rely on their Nevada facility to supply bandwidth, which Enron would sell in a fashion similar to other commodities.\nIn January 2000, Kenneth Lay and Jeffrey Skilling announced to analysts that they were going to open trading for their own \"high-speed fiber-optic networks that form the backbone for Internet traffic\". Investors quickly bought Enron stock following the announcement \"as they did with most things Internet-related at the time\", with stock prices rising from $40 per share in January 2000 to $70 per share in March, peaking at $90 in the summer of 2000. Enron executives obtained windfall gains from the rising stock prices, with a total of $924 million of stocks sold by high-level Enron employees between 2000 and 2001. The head of Enron Broadband Services, Kenneth Rice, sold 1 million shares himself, earning about $70 million in returns. As prices of existing fiber optic cables plummeted due to the vast oversupply of the system, with only 5% of the 40 million miles being active wires, Enron purchased the inactive \"dark fibers\", expecting to buy them at low cost and then make a profit as the need for more usage by internet providers increased, with Enron expecting to lease its acquired dark fibers in 20-year contracts to providers. However, Enron's accounting would use estimates to determine how much their dark fiber would be worth when \"lit\" and apply those estimates to their current income, adding exaggerated revenue to their accounts since transactions were not yet made and it was not known if the cables would ever be active. Enron's trading with other energy companies within the broadband market was its attempt to lure large telecommunications companies, such as Verizon Communications, into its broadband scheme to create its own new market.\nBy the second quarter of 2001, Enron Broadband Services was reporting losses. On March 12, 2001, a proposed 20-year deal between Enron and Blockbuster Inc. to stream movies on demand over Enron's connections was canceled, with Enron shares dropping from $80 per share in mid-February 2001 to below $60 the week after the deal was killed. The branch of the company that Jeffrey Skilling \"said would eventually add $40 billion to Enron's stock value\" added only about $408 million in revenue for Enron in 2001, with the company's broadband arm closed shortly after its meager second-quarter earnings report in July 2001.\nFollowing the bankruptcy of Enron, telecommunications holdings were sold for \"pennies on the dollar\". In 2002, Rob Roy of Switch Communications purchased Enron's Nevada facility in an auction attended only by Roy. Enron's \"fiber plans were so secretive that few people even knew about the auction.\" The facility was sold for only $930,000. Following the sale, Switch expanded to control \"the biggest data center in the world\".\nOverseas expansion.\nEnron, seeing stability after the merger, began to look overseas for new possible energy opportunities in 1991. Enron's first such opportunity was a natural gas power plant utilizing cogeneration that the company built near Middlesbrough, UK. The power plant was so large it could produce up to 3% of the United Kingdom's electricity demand with a capacity of over 1,875 megawatts. Seeing the success in England, the company developed and diversified its assets worldwide under the name of Enron International (EI), headed by former HNG executive Rebecca Mark. By 1994, EI's portfolio included assets in The Philippines, Australia, Guatemala, Germany, France, India, Argentina, the Caribbean, China, England, Colombia, Turkey, Bolivia, Brazil, Indonesia, Norway, Poland, and Japan. The division was producing a large share of earnings for Enron, contributing 25% of earnings in 1996. Mark and EI believed the water industry was the next market to be deregulated by authorities. Seeing the potential, they searched for ways to enter the market, similar to PGE.\nDuring this period of growth, Enron introduced a new corporate identity on January 14, 1997, and from that point adopted their distinctive tricolor E logo. This logo was one of the final projects of legendary graphic designer Paul Rand before his death in 1996, and debuted almost three months after his departure.\nIn 1998, Enron International acquired Wessex Water for $2.88 billion. Wessex Water became the core asset of a new company, Azurix, which expanded to other water companies. After Azurix's promising IPO in June 1999, Enron \"sucked out over $1 billion in cash while loading it up with debt\", according to Bethany McLean and Peter Elkind, authors of \"\". Additionally, British water regulators required Wessex to cut its rates by 12% starting in April 2000, and an upgrade was required of the utility's aging infrastructure, estimated at costing over a billion dollars. By the end of 2000 Azurix had an operating profit of less than $100 million and was $2 billion in debt. In August 2000, after Azurix stock took a plunge following its earnings report, Mark resigned from Azurix and Enron. Azurix assets, including Wessex, were eventually sold by Enron.\nMisleading financial accounts.\nIn 1990, Enron's chief operating officer Jeffrey Skilling hired Andrew Fastow, who was well acquainted with the burgeoning deregulated energy market that Skilling wanted to exploit. In 1993, Fastow began establishing numerous limited liability special-purpose entities, a common business practice in the energy industry. However, it also allowed Enron to transfer some of its liabilities off its books, allowing it to maintain a robust and generally increasing stock price and thus keep its critical investment-grade credit ratings.\nEnron was originally involved in transmitting and distributing electricity and natural gas throughout the US. The company developed, built, and operated power plants and pipelines while dealing with rules of law and other infrastructures worldwide. Enron owned a large network of natural gas pipelines, which stretched coast to coast and border to border including Northern Natural Gas, Florida Gas Transmission, Transwestern Pipeline Company, and a partnership in Northern Border Pipeline from Canada. The states of California, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island had already passed power deregulation laws by July 1996, the time of Enron's proposal to acquire Portland General Electric corporation. During 1998, Enron began operations in the water sector, creating the Azurix Corporation, which it part-floated on the New York Stock Exchange during June 1999. Azurix failed to become successful in the water utility market, and one of its major concessions, in Buenos Aires, was a large-scale money-loser.\nEnron grew wealthy due largely to marketing, promoting power, and having a high stock price. Enron was named \"America's Most Innovative Company\" by \"Fortune\" for six consecutive years, from 1996 to 2001. It was on the \"Fortune\"s \"100 Best Companies to Work for in America\" list during 2000, and had offices that were stunning in their opulence. Enron was hailed by many, including labor and the workforce, as an overall great company, praised for its large long-term pensions, benefits for its workers, and extremely effective management until the exposure of its corporate fraud. The first analyst to question the company's success story was Daniel Scotto, an energy market expert at BNP Paribas, who issued a note in August 2001 entitled \"Enron: All stressed up and no place to go\" which encouraged investors to sell Enron stocks, although he only changed his recommendation on the stock from \"buy\" to \"neutral\".\nAs was later discovered, many of Enron's recorded assets and profits were inflated, wholly fraudulent, or nonexistent. One example was in 1999 when Enron promised to repay Merrill Lynch's investment with interest to show a profit on its books. Debts and losses were put into entities formed offshore that were not included in the company's financial statements; other sophisticated and arcane financial transactions between Enron and related companies were used to eliminate unprofitable entities from the company's books.\nThe company's most valuable asset and the largest source of honest income, the 1930s-era Northern Natural Gas company, was eventually purchased by a group of Omaha investors who relocated its headquarters to their city; it is now a unit of Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Energy. NNG was established as collateral for a $2.5\u00a0billion capital infusion by Dynegy Corporation when Dynegy was planning to buy Enron. When Dynegy examined Enron's financial records carefully, they repudiated the deal and dismissed their CEO, Chuck Watson. The new chairman and CEO, the late Daniel Dienstbier, had been president of NNG and an Enron executive at one time and was forced out by Ken Lay. Dienstbier was an acquaintance of Warren Buffett. NNG continues to be profitable now.\n2001 accounting scandals.\nIn 2001, after a series of revelations involving irregular accounting procedures perpetrated throughout the 1990s involving Enron and its auditor Arthur Andersen that bordered on fraud, Enron filed for the then largest Chapter 11 bankruptcy in history (since surpassed by those of Worldcom during 2002 and Lehman Brothers during 2008), resulting in $11 billion in shareholder losses.\nAs the scandal progressed, Enron share prices decreased from US$90 during the summer of 2000, to just pennies. Enron's demise occurred after the revelation that much of its profit and revenue were the result of deals with special-purpose entities (limited partnerships which it controlled). This maneuver allowed many of Enron's debts and losses to disappear from its financial statements.\nEnron filed for bankruptcy on December 2, 2001. In addition, the scandal caused the dissolution of Arthur Andersen, which at the time was one of the Big Five of the world's accounting firms. The company was found guilty of obstruction of justice in 2002 for destroying documents related to the Enron audit. Since the SEC is not allowed to accept audits from convicted felons, Andersen was forced to stop auditing public companies. Although the conviction was dismissed in 2005 by the Supreme Court, the damage to the Andersen name has prevented it from recovering or reviving itself as a viable business even on a limited scale.\nEnron also withdrew a naming-rights deal with the Houston Astros Major League Baseball club for its new stadium, which was known formerly as Enron Field (now Daikin Park).\nAccounting practices.\nEnron used a variety of deceptive and fraudulent tactics and accounting practices to cover its fraud in reporting Enron's financial information. Special-purpose entities were created to mask significant liabilities from Enron's financial statements. These entities made Enron seem more profitable than it was, and created a dangerous spiral in which, each quarter, corporate officers would have to perform more and more financial deception to create the illusion of billions of dollars in profit while the company was actually losing money. This practice increased their stock price to new levels, at which point the executives began to work on insider information and trade millions of dollars worth of Enron stock. The executives and insiders at Enron knew about the offshore accounts that were hiding losses for the company; the investors, however, did not. Chief Financial Officer Andrew Fastow directed the team that created the off-books companies and manipulated the deals to provide himself, his family, and his friends with hundreds of millions of dollars in guaranteed revenue, at the expense of the corporation for which he worked and its stockholders.\nIn 1999, Enron initiated EnronOnline, an Internet-based trading operation, which was used by virtually every energy company in the United States. By promoting the company's aggressive investment strategy, Enron's president and chief operating officer Jeffrey Skilling helped make Enron the biggest wholesaler of gas and electricity, trading over $27\u00a0billion per quarter. The corporation's financial claims, however, had to be accepted at face value. Under Skilling, Enron adopted mark-to-market accounting, in which anticipated future profits from any deal were tabulated as if currently real. Thus, Enron could record gains from what over time might turn out to be losses, as the company's fiscal health became secondary to manipulating its stock price during the so-called Tech boom. But when a company's success is measured by undocumented financial statements, actual balance sheets are inconvenient. Indeed, Enron's unscrupulous actions were often gambles to keep the deception going and so increase the stock price. An advancing price meant a continued infusion of investor capital on which debt-ridden Enron in large part subsisted (much like a financial \"pyramid\" or \"Ponzi scheme\"). Attempting to maintain the illusion, Skilling verbally attacked Wall Street analyst Richard Grubman, who questioned Enron's unusual accounting practice during a recorded conference telephone call. When Grubman complained that Enron was the only company that could not release a balance sheet along with its earnings statements, Skilling replied, \"Well, thank you very much, we appreciate that\u00a0... asshole.\" Though the comment was met with dismay and astonishment by press, Wall Street analysts and public, it became an inside joke among many Enron employees, mocking Grubman for his perceived meddling rather than Skilling's offensiveness.\nPost-bankruptcy.\nEnron initially planned to retain its three domestic pipeline companies as well as most of its overseas assets. However, before emerging from bankruptcy, Enron sold its domestic pipeline companies as CrossCountry Energy for $2.45 billion and later sold other assets to Vulcan Capital Management.\nEnron sold its last business, Prisma Energy, during 2006, leaving Enron asset-less. During early 2007, its name was changed to Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation. Its goal was to repay the old Enron's remaining creditors and end Enron's affairs. In December 2008, it was announced that Enron's creditors would receive $7.2 billion from the company's liquidation (approximately 17 percent of the debts owed by the company). After Citigroup and JP Morgan Chase were sued for their role in abetting Enron's practices with loans, the two companies agreed to give billions of dollars to Enron's creditors. By May 2011, $21.8 billion had been distributed to the creditors, totaling 53 percent of Enron's debts at the time of bankruptcy. Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation was ultimately dissolved on November 28, 2016.\nAzurix, the former water utility part of the company, remains under Enron ownership, although it is currently asset-less. It is involved in several litigations against the government of Argentina claiming compensation relating to the negligence and corruption of the local governance during its management of the Buenos Aires water concession in 1999, which resulted in substantial amounts of debt (approx. $620\u00a0million) and the eventual collapse of the branch.\nSoon after emerging from bankruptcy in November 2004, Enron's new board of directors sued 11 financial institutions for helping Lay, Fastow, Skilling, and others hide Enron's true financial condition. The proceedings were dubbed the \"megaclaims litigation\". Among the defendants were Royal Bank of Scotland, Deutsche Bank and Citigroup. , Enron has settled with all of the institutions, ending with Citigroup. Enron was able to obtain nearly $7.2 billion to distribute to its creditors as a result of the megaclaims litigation. As of December 2009, some claim and process payments were still being distributed.\nEnron has been featured since its bankruptcy in popular culture, including in \"The Simpsons\" episodes \"That '90s Show\" (Homer buys Enron stock while Marge chooses to keep her own Microsoft shares) and \"Special Edna\", which features a scene of an Enron-themed amusement park ride. The 2007 film \"Bee Movie\" also featured a joke reference to a parody company of Enron called \"Honron\" (a play on the words honey and Enron). The 2003 documentary \"The Corporation\" made frequent references to Enron post-bankruptcy, calling the company a \"bad apple\".\nInsider trading scandal.\nPeak and decline of stock price.\nIn August 2000, Enron's stock price attained its greatest value, closing at $90 on the 23rd. At this time, Enron executives, who possessed inside information on the hidden losses, began to sell their stock. At the same time, the general public and Enron's investors were told to buy the stock. Executives told the investors that the stock would continue to increase until it attained possibly the $130 to $140 range, while secretly unloading their shares.\nAs executives sold their shares, the price began to decrease. Investors were told to continue buying stock or hold steady if they already owned Enron because the stock price would rebound shortly. Kenneth Lay's strategy for responding to Enron's continuing problems was his demeanor. As he did many times, Lay would issue a statement or make an appearance to calm investors and assure them that Enron was doing well. In March 2001 an article by Bethany McLean appeared in \"Fortune\" magazine noting that no one understood how the company made money and questioning whether Enron stock was overvalued.\nBy August 15, 2001, Enron's stock price had decreased to $42. Many of the investors still trusted Lay and believed that Enron would rule the market. They continued to buy or retain their stock as the equity value decreased. As October ended, the stock had decreased to $15. Many considered this a great opportunity to buy Enron stock because of what Lay had been telling them in the media.\nLay was accused of selling more than $70 million worth of stock at this time, which he used to repay cash advances on lines of credit. He sold another $29 million worth of stock in the open market. Also, Lay's wife, Linda, was accused of selling 500,000 shares of Enron stock totaling $1.2\u00a0million on November 28, 2001. The money earned from this sale did not go to the family but rather to charitable organizations, which had already received pledges of contributions from the foundation. Records show that Mrs. Lay made the sale order sometime between 10:00 and 10:20\u00a0am. News of Enron's problems, including the millions of dollars in losses they hid, became public about 10:30 that morning, and the stock price soon decreased to less than one dollar.\nFormer Enron executive Paula Rieker was charged with criminal insider trading and sentenced to two years probation. Rieker obtained 18,380 Enron shares for $15.51 a share. She sold that stock for $49.77 a share in July 2001, a week before the public was told what she already knew about the $102\u00a0million loss. In 2002, after the tumultuous fall of Enron's external auditor, and management consultant, Andersen LLP, former Andersen Director, John M. Cunningham coined the phrase, \"We have all been Enroned.\"\nThe fallout resulted in both Lay and Skilling being convicted of conspiracy, fraud, and insider trading. Lay died before sentencing, Skilling got 24 years and 4 months and a $45 million penalty (later reduced). Fastow was sentenced to six years of jail time, and Lou Pai settled out of court for $31.5 million.\nCalifornia's deregulation and subsequent energy crisis.\nIn October 2000, Daniel Scotto, the most renowned utility analyst on Wall Street, suspended his ratings on all energy companies conducting business in California because of the possibility that the companies would not receive full and adequate compensation for the deferred energy accounts used as the basis for the California Deregulation Plan enacted during the late 1990s. Five months later, Pacific Gas &amp; Electric (PG&amp;E) was forced into bankruptcy. Republican Senator Phil Gramm, husband of Enron Board member Wendy Gramm and also the second-largest recipient of campaign contributions from Enron, succeeded in legislating California's energy commodity trading deregulation. Despite warnings from prominent consumer groups which stated that this law would give energy traders too much influence over energy commodity prices, the legislation was passed in December 2000.\nAs the periodical Public Citizen reported:Because of Enron's new, unregulated power auction, the company's \"Wholesale Services\" revenues quadrupled \u2013 from $12\u00a0billion in the first quarter of 2000 to $48.4\u00a0billion in the first quarter of 2001.After the passage of the deregulation law, California had a total of 38 Stage 3 rolling blackouts declared, until federal regulators intervened in June 2001. These blackouts occurred as a result of a poorly designed market system that was manipulated by traders and marketers, as well as from poor state management and regulatory oversight. Subsequently, Enron traders were revealed as intentionally encouraging the removal of power from the market during California's energy crisis by encouraging suppliers to shut down plants to perform unnecessary maintenance, as documented in recordings made at the time. These acts contributed to the need for rolling blackouts, which adversely affected many businesses dependent upon a reliable supply of electricity, and inconvenienced a large number of retail customers. This scattered supply increased the price, and Enron traders were thus able to sell power at premium prices, sometimes up to a factor of 20 times its normal peak value.\nThe callousness of the traders' attitude toward ratepayers was documented in an evidence tape of a conversation regarding the matter, and sarcastically referencing the confusion of retiree voters in Florida's Miami-Dade County in the November 2000, presidential election.\n\"They're fucking taking all the money back from you guys? All the money you guys stole from those poor grandmothers in California?\"\n\"Yeah, Grandma Millie man. But she's the one who couldn't figure out how to fucking vote on the butterfly ballot.\" (Laughing from both sides.)\n\"Yeah, now she wants her fucking money back for all the power you've charged right up, jammed right up her ass for fucking $250 a megawatt-hour.\"\nThe traders had been discussing the efforts of the Snohomish PUD in Northwestern Washington state to recover the massive overcharges that Enron had engineered. Morgan Stanley, which had taken Enron's place in the lawsuit, fought the release of the documents that the PUD had sought to make its case, but were being withheld by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.\nProducts.\nEnron traded in more than 30 different products, including oil and LNG transportation, broadband, principal investments, risk management for commodities, shipping / freight, streaming media, and water and wastewater. Products traded on EnronOnline in particular included petrochemicals, plastics, power, pulp and paper, steel, and weather risk management. Enron was also an extensive futures trader, including sugar, coffee, grains, hogs, and other meat futures. At the time of its bankruptcy filing in December 2001, Enron was structured into seven distinct business units.\nCapital and risk management services.\nProject development and management services.\nEnron manufactured gas valves, circuit breakers, thermostats, and electrical equipment in Venezuela using INSELA SA, a 50\u201350 joint venture with General Electric. Enron owned three paper and pulp products companies: Garden State Paper, a newsprint mill; as well as Papiers Stadacona and St. Aurelie Timberlands. Enron had a controlling stake in the Louisiana-based petroleum exploration and production company Mariner Energy.\nEnronOnline.\nEnron opened EnronOnline, an electronic trading platform for energy commodities, on November 29, 1999. Conceptualized by the company's European Gas Trading team, it was the first web-based transaction system that allowed buyers and sellers to buy, sell, and trade commodity products globally. It allowed users to do business only with Enron. The site allowed Enron to transact with participants in the global energy markets. The main commodities offered on EnronOnline were natural gas and electricity, although there were 500 other products including credit derivatives, bankruptcy swaps, pulp, gas, plastics, paper, steel, metals, freight, and TV commercial time. At its maximum, more than $6 billion worth of commodities were transacted using EnronOnline every day, but specialists questioned how Enron reported trades and calculated its profits, saying that the same fraudulent accounting that was rampant at Enron's other operations may have been used in trading.\nAfter Enron's bankruptcy in late 2001, EnronOnline was sold to the Swiss financial giant UBS. Within a year, UBS abandoned its efforts to relaunch the division and closed it in November 2002.\nEnron International.\nEnron International (EI) was Enron's wholesale asset development and asset management business. Its primary emphasis was developing and building natural gas power plants outside North America. Enron Engineering and Construction Company (EECC) was a wholly owned subsidiary of Enron International and built almost all of Enron International's power plants. Unlike other business units of Enron, Enron International had a strong cash flow at the bankruptcy filing. Enron International consisted of all of Enron's foreign power projects, including ones in Europe.\nThe company's Teesside plant was one of the largest gas-fired power stations in the world, built and operated by Enron from 1989, and produced 3 percent of the United Kingdom's energy needs. Enron owned half of the plant's equity, with the remaining 50 percent split between four regional electricity companies.\nManagement.\nRebecca Mark was the CEO of Enron International until she resigned to manage Enron's newly acquired water business, Azurix, in 1997. Mark had a major role in the development of the Dabhol project in India, Enron's largest international endeavor.\nProjects.\nEnron International constructed power plants and pipelines across the globe. Some are presently still operating, including the massive Teesside plant in England. Others, like a barge-mounted plant off Puerto Plata in the Dominican Republic, cost Enron money through lawsuits and investment losses. Puerto Plata was a barge-mounted power plant next to the hotel \"Hotelero del Atlantico\". When the plant was activated, winds blew soot from the plant onto the hotel guests' meals, blackening their food. The winds also blew garbage from nearby slums into the plant's water-intake system. For some time the only solution was to hire men who would row out and push the garbage away with their paddles. Through mid-2000 the company collected a paltry $3.5\u00a0million from a $95\u00a0million investment. Enron also had other investment projects in Europe, Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Colombia, Mexico, Jamaica, Venezuela, elsewhere in South America and across the Caribbean.\nIndia.\nAround 1992 Indian experts came to the United States to find energy investors to help with India's energy shortage problems. During December 1993, Enron finalized a 20-year power-purchase contract with the Maharashtra State Electricity Board. The contract allowed Enron to construct a massive 2,015 megawatt power plant on a remote volcanic bluff south of Mumbai through a two-phase project called Dabhol Power Station. Construction would be completed in two phases, and Enron would form the Dabhol Power Company to help manage the plant. The power project was the first step in a $20\u00a0billion scheme to help rebuild and stabilize India's power grid. Enron, GE (which was selling turbines to the project), and Bechtel (which was constructing the plant), each contributed 10% equity with the remaining 90% covered by the MSEB \nIn 1996, when India's Congress Party was no longer in power, the Indian government assessed the project as being excessively expensive, refused to pay for the plant, and stopped construction. The MSEB was required by contract to continue to pay Enron plant maintenance charges, even if no power was purchased from the plant. The MSEB determined that it could not afford to purchase the power (at Rs. 8 per unit kWh) charged by Enron. The plant operator was unable to find alternate customers for Dabhol power due to the absence of a free market in the regulated structure of utilities in India.\nBy 2000, the Dabhol plant was almost complete and Phase 1 had begun producing power. Enron as a whole, however, was heavily overextended, and in the summer of that year Mark and all the key executives at Enron International were asked to resign from Enron to reshape the company and get rid of asset businesses. Shortly thereafter a payment dispute with MSEB ensued, and Enron issued a stop-work order on the plant in June 2001. From 1996 until Enron's bankruptcy in 2001 the company tried to revive the project and revive interest in India's need for the power plant without success. By December 2001 the Enron scandal and bankruptcy cut short any opportunity to revive the construction and complete the plant. In 2005, an Indian government-run company, Ratnagiri Gas and Power, was set up to finish construction on the Dabhol facility and operate the plant.\nProject summer.\nDuring the summer of 2001, Enron attempted to sell several of Enron International's assets, many of which were not sold. The public and media believed it was unknown why Enron wanted to sell these assets, suspecting it was because Enron needed cash. Employees who worked with company assets were told in 2000 that Jeff Skilling believed that business assets were an outdated means of a company's worth, and instead he wanted to build a company based on \"intellectual assets\".\nEnron Global Exploration &amp; Production, Inc..\nEnron Global Exploration &amp; Production Inc. (EGEP) was an Enron subsidiary that was born from the split of domestic assets via EOG Resources (formerly Enron Oil and Gas EOG) and international assets via EGEP (formerly Enron Oil and Gas Int'l, Ltd EOGIL). \nAmong the EGEP assets were the Panna-Mukta and the South Tapti fields, discovered by the Indian state-owned Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC), which operated the fields initially.\nDecember 1994, a joint venture began between ONGC (40%), Enron (30%) and Reliance (30%).\nMid-year of 2002, British Gas (BG) completed the acquisition of EGEP's 30% share of the Panna-Mukta and Tapti fields for $350 million, a few months before Enron filed bankruptcy.\nEnron Prize for Distinguished Public Service.\nDuring the mid-1990s, Enron established an endowment for the Enron Prize for Distinguished Public Service, awarded by Rice University's Baker Institute to \"recognize outstanding individuals for their contributions to public service\". Recipients were:\nGreenspan, because of his position as the Fed chairman, was not at liberty to accept the $10,000 honorarium, the $15,000 sculpture, nor the crystal trophy, but only accepted the \"honor\" of being named an Enron Prize recipient. The situation was further complicated because a few days earlier, Enron had filed paperwork admitting it had falsified financial statements for five years. Greenspan did not mention Enron a single time during his speech. At the ceremony, Ken Lay stated, \"I'm looking forward to our first woman recipient.\" The next morning, it was reported in the \"Houston Chronicle\" that no decision had been made on whether the name of the prize would be changed. 19 days after the prize was awarded to Greenspan, Enron declared bankruptcy.\nIn early 2002, Enron was awarded Harvard's (in)famous Ig Nobel Prize for \"Most Creative Use of Imaginary Numbers\". The various former members of the Enron management team all refused to accept the award in person, although no reason was given at the time.\n\"Women of Enron\".\nIn 2002, the \"Playboy\" magazine featured a nude pictorial \"Women of Enron\", with ten former and contemporary Enron female employees. The women said they posed for the fun and to earn some money.\nSatirical reboot (2024).\nOn December 2nd, 2024, a new tweet was posted on the @Enron X account. The tweet had the caption \"We're back. Can we talk?\", along with a promotional video. Viewers also noticed that the website enron.com was also functional. The replies alleged a potential cryptocurrency scam, but others pointed to the new terms of service including a clause explicitly stating that the content on the website was parody protected under the First Amendment. Many pointed out that this was likely a joke, as the domain seemed to be registered by Peter McIndoe, a performance artist and founder of Birds Aren't Real. Additionally, the name Enron had been purchased at auction by The College Company for $275 in 2020.\nOn December 9th, 2024, it was announced that the CEO of Enron was Connor Gaydos, another cofounder of The College Company and Birds Aren't Real. It was also announced that Enron planned to hold a new \"Enron Power Summit\" on January 6, 2025. On December 12, 2024, the Twitter page @Pubity posted video of Gaydos being pied in the face. Many viewers quickly assumed the incident was staged, and it may have been a parody of an incident when Jeff Skilling was pied in the face by a California woman.\nOn January 6, 2025, Enron announced the Enron Egg, its first new product in 20 years. Gaydos claimed that the product was a micro nuclear reactor capable of powering a suburban home for 10 years using 20% enriched uranium in the form of uranium zirconium hydride. The announcement supposedly took place at the previously-announced \"Enron Power Summit,\" but the Houston Chronicle was unable to confirm that such an event actually took place."}
{"id": "10168", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10168", "title": "Eusebius of Alexandria", "text": "Eusebius of Alexandria () was a 6th-century Christian author to whom certain extant homilies are attributed.\nBiography.\nNothing is known of the author. In all events, he was not a patriarch of Alexandria, as is affirmed in an early biography, written by one Johannes, a notary, and stating that Eusebius was called by Cyril to be his successor in the episcopate.\nThere has been much dispute regarding the details of his life and the age in which he lived. Galland (Vet. Patr. Biblioth., VIII, 23) says: \"de Eusebio qui vulgo dicitur episcopus Alexandr\u00e6 incerta omnia\" (Concerning Eusebius, commonly called bishop of Alexandria there is nothing sure). His writings have been attributed to Eusebius of Emesa, Eusebius of C\u00e6sarea, and others. According to an old biography said to have been written by his notary, the monk John, and discovered by Cardinal Mai, he lived in the fifth century and led a monastic life near Alexandria. The fame of his virtues attracted the attention of Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, who visited him with his clergy, and in 444, when dying, had him elected his successor, and consecrated him bishop, though much against his will. Eusebius displayed great zeal in the exercise of his office and did much good by his preaching. Among those he converted was a certain Alexander, a man of senatorial rank. After having ruled his see for seven or, according to another account, for twenty years, he made Alexander his successor and retired to the desert, whence Cyril had summoned him and there died in the odor of sanctity.\nWhile Mai seems to have established the existence of a Eusebius of Alexandria who lived in the fifth century, it had been objected than neither the name of Eusebius or his successor Alexander, appears in the list of the occupants of that ancient see. Dioscurus is mentioned as the immediate successor of Cyril. Nor does the style of the homilies seem on the whole in keeping with the age of Cyril. It may be noted, however, that the biographer of Eusebius expressly states that the Cyril in question is the great opponent of Nestorius. Various solution of the difficulty have been proposed. Thilo thinks that the authorship of the homilies is to be assigned either to a certain monk \u2013 one of four brothers 3 of the fifth century, or to a presbyter and court chaplain of Justinian I, who took an active part in the theological strifes of the sixth century. Mai suggests that after the death of Cyril, there were two bishops at Alexandria, Dioscurus, the Monophysite leader, and Eusebius, the head of the Catholic party. The homilies cover a variety of subjects, and the author is one of the earliest patristic witnesses to the doctrine regarding the descent of Christ into Hell. A list of homilies with the complete text is given by Mai. They may also be found in Migne, which was published with an introduction by Rand in \"Modern Philology\", II, 261.\nWorks.\nThese homilies enjoyed some renown in the Eastern Church in the sixth and seventh centuries.\nThe discourses belong probably to the fifth or sixth century, and possibly originated in Alexandria. They deal with the life of Jesus of Nazareth and with questions of ecclesiastical life and practise, which they resolve in a monastic-ascetic way. Their literary character is not quite clear; while most of them are adapted for public delivery, not a few bear the character of ecclesiastical pronouncements. They are now in print except four included among John Chrysostom's works. The fragments preserved in the so-called \"Sacra parallela\" are to be found in Karl Holl's \"Fragmente vornic\u00e4nischer Kirchenv\u00e4ter.\" A homily concerning the observance of Sunday is attributed by Zahn to Eusebius of Emesa."}
{"id": "10169", "revid": "24050972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10169", "title": "Eusebius of Angers", "text": "Eusebius (Bruno) of Angers (died September 1, 1081) was bishop of Angers, France.\nHe first appears in the historical record as bishop of Angers at the synod of Rheims in 1049, and for a long time had been an adherent of Berengar's doctrine of the Lord's Supper. As such he was highly regarded by Berengar himself and by his opponents Theodwin of Li\u00e8ge, Durand of Troarne, and Humbert of Mourmoutiers. But when he recognized the strength of the opposition, he favored a compromise; at any rate he advised Berengar is 1054 to swear to the formula presented to him.\nNevertheless, Berengar considered him his friend many years later and requested him to silence a certain Galfrid Martini or to arrange a disputation. In his reply Eusebius not only regretted the whole controversy, but also stated that he would abide by the words of the Bible, according to which the bread and wine after the consecration become the body and blood of the Lord (see transubstantiation); if one asks how this can take place, the answer must be that it is not according to the order of nature but in accordance with the divine omnipotence; at any rate one must be careful not to give offense to the plain Christian. The epistle is a downright renunciation of Berengar in case he should still maintain his view.\nIn favor of the supposition that Eusebius changed his opinion from deference to the Count of Anjou, the decided opponent of Berengar and his doctrine, it can be adduced that he did not defend Berengar against the hostilities of the court, and that for a long time he sided with this violent prince. It is also possible that the fact impressed itself upon Eusebius that the religious consciousness of the time more and more opposed Berengar. Our knowledge, however, is too fragmentary to pass a very accurate sentence."}
{"id": "10172", "revid": "47474982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10172", "title": "Eusebius", "text": "Eusebius of Caesarea (30 May AD 339), also known as Eusebius Pamphilius, was a Greek Syro-Palestinian historian of Christianity, exegete, and Christian polemicist. In about AD 314 he became the bishop of Caesarea Maritima in the Roman province of Syria Palaestina.\nTogether with Pamphilus, Eusebius was a scholar of the biblical canon and is regarded as one of the most learned Christians during late antiquity. He wrote the \"Demonstrations of the Gospel\", \"Preparations for the Gospel\" and \"On Discrepancies between the Gospels\", studies of the biblical text. His work \"Onomasticon\" is an early geographical lexicon of places in the Holy Land mentioned in the Bible. As \"Father of Church History\" (not to be confused with the title of Church Father), he produced the \"Ecclesiastical History\", \"On the Life of Pamphilus\", the \"Chronicle\" and \"On the Martyrs\". He also produced a biographical work on Constantine the Great, the first Christian Roman emperor, who was \"Augustus\" between AD 306 and AD 337.\nSources.\nLittle is known about the life of Eusebius. His successor at the See of Caesarea, Acacius, wrote a \"Life of Eusebius\", a work that has since been lost. Eusebius's own surviving works probably only represent a small portion of his total output. Beyond notices in his extant writings, the major sources are the 5th-century ecclesiastical historians Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret, and the 4th-century Christian author Jerome. There are assorted notices of his activities in the writings of his contemporaries Athanasius, Arius, Eusebius of Nicomedia, and Alexander of Alexandria. Eusebius's pupil, Eusebius of Emesa, provides some incidental information.\nEarly life.\nMost scholars date the birth of Eusebius to some point between AD 260 and 265. He was most likely born in or around Caesarea Maritima. Nothing is known about his parents. He was baptized and instructed in the city, and lived in Syria Palaestina in 296, when Diocletian's army passed through the region (in the \"Life of Constantine\", Eusebius recalls seeing Constantine traveling with the army).\nEusebius was made presbyter by Agapius of Caesarea. Some, like theologian and ecclesiastical historian John Henry Newman, understand Eusebius's statement that he had heard Dorotheus of Tyre \"expound the Scriptures wisely in the Church\" to indicate that Eusebius was Dorotheus's pupil while the priest was resident in Antioch; others, like the scholar D. S. Wallace-Hadrill, deem the phrase too ambiguous to support the contention.\nThrough the activities of the theologian Origen (185/6\u2013254) and the school of his follower Pamphilus (later 3rd century \u2013 309), Caesarea became a center of Christian learning. Origen was largely responsible for the collection of usage information, or which churches were using which gospels, regarding the texts which became the New Testament. The information used to create the late-fourth-century Easter Letter, which declared accepted Christian writings, was probably based on the \"Ecclesiastical History\" [HE] of Eusebius of Caesarea, wherein he uses the information passed on to him by Origen to create both his list at HE 3:25 and Origen's list at HE 6:25. Eusebius got his information about what texts were accepted by the third-century churches throughout the known world, a great deal of which Origen knew of firsthand from his extensive travels, from the library and writings of Origen.\nOn his deathbed, Origen had made a bequest of his private library to the Christian community in the city. Together with the books of his patron Ambrosius, Origen's library (including the original manuscripts of his works) formed the core of the collection that Pamphilus established. Pamphilus also managed a school that was similar to (or perhaps a re-establishment of) that of Origen. He was compared to Demetrius of Phalerum\u2014as well as to another (evidently, learn\u00e8d) scholar by the name of \"Pisistratus\"\u2014for Pamphilus had gathered Bibles \"from all parts of the world\". Like his model Origen, Pamphilus maintained close contact with his students. Eusebius, in his history of the persecutions, alludes to the fact that many of the Caesarean martyrs lived together, presumably under Pamphilus.\nSoon after Pamphilus settled in Caesarea ( 280s), he began teaching Eusebius, who was then somewhere between twenty and twenty-five. Because of his close relationship with his schoolmaster, Eusebius was sometimes called \"Eusebius Pamphili\": \"Eusebius, son of Pamphilus\". The name may also indicate that Eusebius was made Pamphilus' heir. Pamphilus gave Eusebius a strong admiration for the thought of Origen. Neither Pamphilus nor Eusebius knew Origen personally; Pamphilus probably picked up Origenist ideas during his studies under Pierius (nicknamed \"Origen Junior\") in Alexandria.\nEusebius's \"Preparation for the Gospel\" bears witness to the literary tastes of Origen: Eusebius quotes no comedy, tragedy, or lyric poetry, but makes reference to all the works of Plato and to an extensive range of later philosophic works, largely from Middle Platonists from Philo to the late 2nd century. Whatever its secular contents, the primary aim of Origen and Pamphilus's school was to promote sacred learning. The library's biblical and theological contents were more impressive: Origen's \"Hexapla\" and \"Tetrapla\"; a copy of the original Aramaic version of the Gospel of Matthew; and many of Origen's own writings. Marginal comments in extant manuscripts note that Pamphilus and his friends and pupils, including Eusebius, corrected and revised much of the biblical text in their library. Their efforts made the hexaplaric Septuagint text increasingly popular in Syria and Palestine. Soon after joining Pamphilus's school, Eusebius started helping his master expand the library's collections and broaden access to its resources. At about this time Eusebius compiled a \"Collection of Ancient Martyrdoms\", presumably for use as a general reference tool.\nIn the 290s, Eusebius began work on his most important work, the \"Ecclesiastical History\", a narrative history of the Church and Christian community from the Apostolic Age to Eusebius's own time. At about the same time, he worked on his \"Chronicle\", a universal calendar of events from the Creation to, again, Eusebius's own time. He completed the first editions of the \"Ecclesiastical History\" and \"Chronicle\" before 300.\nBishop of Caesarea.\nEusebius succeeded Agapius as Bishop of Caesarea soon after 313 and was called on by Arius who had been excommunicated by his bishop Alexander of Alexandria. An episcopal council in Caesarea pronounced Arius blameless. Eusebius enjoyed the favor of the Emperor Constantine. Because of this he was called upon to present the creed of his own church to the 318 attendees of the Council of Nicaea in 325. However, the anti-Arian creed from Palestine prevailed, becoming the basis for the Nicene Creed.\nThe theological views of Arius, that taught the subordination of the Son to the Father, continued to be controversial. Eustathius of Antioch strongly opposed the growing influence of Origen's theology as the root of Arianism. Eusebius, an admirer of Origen, was reproached by Eustathius for deviating from the Nicene faith. Eusebius prevailed and Eustathius was deposed at a synod in Antioch.\nHowever, Athanasius of Alexandria became a more powerful opponent and in 334 he was summoned before a synod in Caesarea (which he refused to attend). In the following year, he was again summoned before a synod in Tyre at which Eusebius of Caesarea presided. Athanasius, foreseeing the result, went to Constantinople to bring his cause before the Emperor. Constantine called the bishops to his court, among them Eusebius. Athanasius was condemned and exiled at the end of 335. Eusebius remained in the Emperor's favour throughout this time and more than once was exonerated with the explicit approval of the Emperor Constantine. After the Emperor's death (), Eusebius wrote the \"Life of Constantine\", an important historical work because of eyewitness accounts and the use of primary sources.\nWorks.\nOf the extensive literary activity of Eusebius, a relatively large portion has been preserved. Although posterity suspected him of Arianism, Eusebius had made himself indispensable by his method of authorship; his comprehensive and careful excerpts from original sources saved his successors the painstaking labor of original research. Hence, much has been preserved, quoted by Eusebius, which otherwise would have been lost.\nThe literary productions of Eusebius reflect on the whole the course of his life. At first, he occupied himself with works on biblical criticism under the influence of Pamphilus and probably of Dorotheus of Tyre of the School of Antioch. Afterward, the persecutions under Diocletian and Galerius directed his attention to the martyrs of his own time and the past, and this led him to the history of the whole Church and finally to the history of the world, which, to him, was only a preparation for ecclesiastical history.\nThen followed the time of the Arian controversies, and dogmatic questions came into the foreground. Christianity at last found recognition by the State; and this brought new problems \u2013 apologies of a different sort had to be prepared. Lastly, Eusebius wrote eulogies in praise of Constantine. To all this activity must be added numerous writings of a miscellaneous nature, addresses, letters, and the like, and exegetical works that extended over the whole of his life and that include both commentaries and an important treatise on the location of biblical place names and the distances between these cities.\nBiblical text criticism.\nPamphilus and Eusebius occupied themselves with the textual criticism of the Septuagint text of the Old Testament and especially of the New Testament. An edition of the Septuagint seems to have been already prepared by Origen, which, according to Jerome, was revised and circulated by Eusebius and Pamphilus. For an easier survey of the material of the four Evangelists, Eusebius divided his edition of the New Testament into paragraphs and provided it with a synoptical table so that it might be easier to find the pericopes that belong together. These canon tables or \"Eusebian canons\" remained in use throughout the Middle Ages, and illuminated manuscript versions are important for the study of early medieval art, as they are the most elaborately decorated pages of many Gospel books. Eusebius detailed in \"Epistula ad Carpianum\" how to use his canons.\n\"Chronicle\".\nThe \"Chronicle\" ( (\"Pantodape historia\")) is divided into two parts. The first part, the \"Chronography\" ( (\"Chronographia\")), gives an epitome of universal history from the sources, arranged according to nations. The second part, the \"Canons\" ( (\"Chronikoi kanones\")), furnishes a synchronism of the historical material in parallel columns, the equivalent of a parallel timeline.\nThe work as a whole has been lost in the original Greek, but it may be reconstructed from later chronographists of the Byzantine school who made excerpts from the work, especially George Syncellus. The tables of the second part have been completely preserved in a Latin translation by Jerome, and both parts are still extant in an Armenian translation. The loss of the Greek originals has given the Armenian translation a special importance; thus, the first part of Eusebius's \"Chronicle\", of which only a few fragments exist in Greek, has been preserved entirely in Armenian, though with lacunae. The \"Chronicle\" as preserved extends to the year 325.\n\"Church History\".\nIn his \"Church History\" or \"Ecclesiastical History\", Eusebius wrote the second surviving history of the Christian Church as a chronologically ordered account, based on earlier sources, complete from the period of the Apostles to his own epoch. The time scheme correlated the history with the reigns of the Roman Emperors, and the scope was broad. Included were the bishops and other teachers of the Church, Christian relations with the Jews and those deemed heretical, and the Christian martyrs through 324. Although its accuracy and biases have been questioned, it remains an important source on the early church due to Eusebius's access to materials now lost.\n\"Life of Constantine\".\nEusebius's \"Life of Constantine\" (\"Vita Constantini\") is a eulogy or panegyric, and therefore its style and selection of facts are affected by its purpose, rendering it inadequate as a continuation of the \"Church History.\" As the historian Socrates Scholasticus said, at the opening of his history which was designed as a continuation of Eusebius, \"Also in writing the life of Constantine, this same author has but slightly treated of matters regarding Arius, being more intent on the rhetorical finish of his composition and the praises of the emperor than on an accurate statement of facts.\" The work was unfinished at Eusebius's death. Some scholars have questioned the Eusebian authorship of this work. \nConversion of Constantine according to Eusebius.\nWriting after Constantine had died, Eusebius claimed that the emperor himself had recounted to him that some time between the death of his father \u2013 the \"augustus\" Constantius \u2013 and his final battle against his rival Maxentius as \"augustus\" in the West, Constantine experienced a vision in which he and his soldiers beheld a Christian symbol, \"a cross-shaped trophy formed from light\", above the sun at midday. Attached to the symbol was the phrase \"by this conquer\" (), a phrase often rendered into Latin as \"in hoc signo vinces\". In a dream that night \"the Christ of God appeared to him with the sign which had appeared in the sky, and urged him to make himself a copy of the sign which had appeared in the sky, and to use this as a protection against the attacks of the enemy.\" Eusebius relates that this happened \"on a campaign he [Constantine] was conducting somewhere\". It is unclear from Eusebius's description whether the shields were marked with a Christian cross or with a \"chi-rho\", a staurogram, or another similar symbol.\nThe Latin text \"De mortibus persecutorum\" contains an early account of the 28 October 312 Battle of the Milvian Bridge written by Lactantius probably in 313, the year following the battle. Lactantius does not mention a vision in the sky but describes a revelatory dream on the eve of battle. Eusebius's work of that time, his \"Church History\", also makes no mention of the vision. The Arch of Constantine, constructed in AD 315, neither depicts a vision nor any Christian insignia in its depiction of the battle. In his posthumous biography of Constantine, Eusebius agrees with Lactantius that Constantine received instructions in a dream to apply a Christian symbol as a device to his soldiers' shields, but unlike Lactantius and subsequent Christian tradition, Eusebius does not date the events to October 312 and does not connect Constantine's vision and dream-vision with the Battle of the Milvian Bridge.\nMinor historical works.\nBefore he compiled his church history, Eusebius edited a collection of martyrdoms of the earlier period and a biography of Pamphilus. The martyrology has not survived as a whole, but it has been preserved almost completely in parts. It contained:\nOf the life of Pamphilus, only a fragment survives. A work on the martyrs of Palestine in the time of Diocletian was composed after 311; numerous fragments are scattered in legendaries which have yet to be collected. The life of Constantine was compiled after the death of the emperor and the election of his sons as Augusti (337). It is more a rhetorical eulogy on the emperor than a history but is of great value on account of numerous documents incorporated into it.\nApologetic and dogmatic works.\nTo the class of apologetic and dogmatic works belong:\nA number of writings, belonging in this category, have been entirely lost.\nExegetical and miscellaneous works.\nAll of the exegetical works of Eusebius have suffered damage in transmission. The majority of them are known to us only from long portions quoted in Byzantine catena-commentaries. However these portions are very extensive. Extant are:\nEusebius also wrote a work ', \"On the Differences of the Gospels\" (including solutions). This was written for the purpose of harmonizing the contradictions in the reports of the different Evangelists. This work was recently (2011) translated into the English language by David J. Miller and Adam C. McCollum and was published under the name \"Eusebius of Caesarea: Gospel Problems and Solutions\". The original work was also translated into Syriac, and lengthy quotations exist in a \"catena\" in that language, and also in Arabic catenas.\nEusebius also wrote treatises on the biblical past; these three treatises have been lost. They were:\nThe addresses and sermons of Eusebius are mostly lost, but some have been preserved, e.g., a sermon on the consecration of the church in Tyre and an address on the thirtieth anniversary of the reign of Constantine (336).\nMost of Eusebius's letters are lost. His letters to Carpianus and Flacillus exist complete. Fragments of a letter to the empress Constantia also exists.\nDoctrine.\nEusebius is fairly unusual in his preterist, or fulfilled, eschatological view. Saying \"the Holy Scriptures foretell that there will be unmistakable signs of the Coming of Christ. Now there were among the Hebrews three outstanding offices of dignity, which made the nation famous, firstly the kingship, secondly that of prophet, and lastly the high priesthood. The prophecies said that the abolition and complete destruction of all these three together would be the sign of the presence of the Christ. And that the proofs that the times had come, would lie in the ceasing of the Mosaic worship, the desolation of Jerusalem and its Temple, and the subjection of the whole Jewish race to its enemies. ...The holy oracles foretold that all these changes, which had not been made in the days of the prophets of old, would take place at the coming of the Christ, which I will presently shew to have been fulfilled as never before in accordance with the predictions\" (\"Demonstratio Evangelica\" VIII).\nFrom a dogmatic point of view, Eusebius is related in his views to Origen. Like Origen, he started from the fundamental thought of the absolute sovereignty (\"monarchia\") of God. God is the cause of all beings. But he is not merely a cause; in him everything good is included, from him all life originates, and he is the source of all virtue. God sent Christ into the world that it may partake of the blessings included in the essence of God. Eusebius expressly distinguishes the Son as distinct from Father as a ray is also distinct from its source the sun.\nEusebius held that men were sinners by their own free choice and not by the necessity of their natures. Eusebius said:\nThe Creator of all things has impressed a natural law upon the soul of every man, as an assistant and ally in his conduct, pointing out to him the right way by this law; but, by the free liberty with which he is endowed, making the choice of what is best worthy of praise and acceptance, he has acted rightly, not by force, but from his own free-will, when he had it in his power to act otherwise, As, again, making him who chooses what is worst, deserving of blame and punishment, because he has by his own motion neglected the natural law, and becoming the origin and fountain of wickedness, and misusing himself, not from any extraneous necessity, but from free will and judgment. The fault is in him who chooses, not in God. For God has not made nature or the substance of the soul bad; for he who is good can make nothing but what is good. Everything is good which is according to nature. Every rational soul has naturally a good free-will, formed for the choice of what is good. But when a man acts wrongly, nature is not to be blamed; for what is wrong, takes place not according to nature, but contrary to nature, it being the work of choice, and not of nature.\nA letter Eusebius is supposed to have written to Constantine's daughter Constantina, refusing to fulfill her request for images of Christ, was quoted in the decrees (now lost) of the Iconoclast Council of Hieria in 754, and later quoted in part in the rebuttal of the Hieria decrees in the Second Council of Nicaea of 787, now the only source from which some of the text is known. The authenticity or authorship of the letter remains uncertain.\nNicene Creed.\nIn the June 2002 issue of the \"Church History\" journal, Pier Franco Beatrice reports that Eusebius testified that the word \"homoousios\" (consubstantial) \"was inserted in the Nicene Creed solely by the personal order of Constantine.\"\nHowever, the council evidently did not force the insertion of the word and instead adopted a text related to the confession of Jerusalem. The role of Constantine remained uncertain during the council.\nAssessment.\nAlternate views have suggested that Gibbon's dismissal of Eusebius is inappropriate:\nWhile many have shared Burckhardt's assessment, particularly with reference to the \"Life of Constantine\", others, while not pretending to extol his merits, have acknowledged the irreplaceable value of his works which may principally reside in the copious quotations that they contain from other sources, often lost.\nVeneration.\nThe earliest recorded feast day of Eusebius is found in the earliest known Syrian Martyrology dating to the year 411 translated by William Wright. The Martyrology lists his feast day as May 30. Eusebius continues to be venerated as a Saint by the modern-day Syrian Orthodox Church as well, with a feast day on February 29 according to the official calendar of Saints created by Corbishop Rajan Achen.\nEusebius was long venerated in the Roman Catholic Church. Bishop J. B. Lightfoot writes in his entry for St. Eusebius in Henry Wace's \"Dictionary of Christian Biography and Literature to the End of the Sixth Century AD, with an Account of Principal Sects and Heresies\" (1911) that \"in the Martyrologium Romanum itself he held his place for centuries\" and in \"Gallican service-books the historian is commemorated as a saint.\" However, Lightfoot notes that in \"the revision of this Martyrology under Gregory XIII his name was struck out, and Eusebius of Samosata was substituted, under the mistaken idea that Caesarea had been substituted for Samosata by a mistake.\" The Roman Catholic author Henri Valois includes in his translations on Eusebius's writings testimonies of ancient authors in favor and against Eusebius; in the former category he includes evidence of Eusebius in several martyrologies and being entitled \"Blessed\" dating back to Victorius of Aquitaine. Valois includes both Usuardus and Notker, who list his feast as June 21 in the Roman Martyrology, and a Gallican breviary is included for June 21 that reads as follows:\nA bone fragment relic of Eusebius within its original reliquary is on display at the Shrine of All Saints located within St. Martha's Catholic Church in Morton Grove, Illinois."}
{"id": "10173", "revid": "1264692478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10173", "title": "Empiricist", "text": ""}
{"id": "10174", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10174", "title": "Empiricism", "text": "In philosophy, empiricism is an epistemological view which holds that true knowledge or justification comes only or primarily from sensory experience and empirical evidence. It is one of several competing views within epistemology, along with rationalism and skepticism. Empiricists argue that empiricism is a more reliable method of finding the truth than purely using logical reasoning, because humans have cognitive biases and limitations which lead to errors of judgement. Empiricism emphasizes the central role of empirical evidence in the formation of ideas, rather than innate ideas or traditions. Empiricists may argue that traditions (or customs) arise due to relations of previous sensory experiences. \nHistorically, empiricism was associated with the \"blank slate\" concept (\"tabula rasa\"), according to which the human mind is \"blank\" at birth and develops its thoughts only through later experience. \nEmpiricism in the philosophy of science emphasizes evidence, especially as discovered in experiments. It is a fundamental part of the scientific method that all hypotheses and theories must be tested against observations of the natural world rather than resting solely on \"a priori\" reasoning, intuition, or revelation.\nEmpiricism, often used by natural scientists, believes that \"knowledge is based on experience\" and that \"knowledge is tentative and probabilistic, subject to continued revision and falsification\". Empirical research, including experiments and validated measurement tools, guides the scientific method.\nEtymology.\nThe English term \"empirical\" derives from the Ancient Greek word \u1f10\u03bc\u03c0\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1\u03af\u03b1, \"empeiria\", which is cognate with and translates to the Latin \"experientia\", from which the words \"experience\" and \"experiment\" are derived.\nBackground.\nA central concept in science and the scientific method is that conclusions must be \"empirically\" based on the evidence of the senses. Both natural and social sciences use working hypotheses that are testable by observation and experiment. The term \"semi-empirical\" is sometimes used to describe theoretical methods that make use of basic axioms, established scientific laws, and previous experimental results to engage in reasoned model building and theoretical inquiry.\nPhilosophical empiricists hold no knowledge to be properly inferred or deduced unless it is derived from one's sense-based experience. In epistemology (theory of knowledge) empiricism is typically contrasted with rationalism, which holds that knowledge may be derived from reason independently of the senses, and in the philosophy of mind it is often contrasted with innatism, which holds that some knowledge and ideas are already present in the mind at birth. However, many Enlightenment rationalists and empiricists still made concessions to each other. For example, the empiricist John Locke admitted that some knowledge (e.g. knowledge of God's existence) could be arrived at through intuition and reasoning alone. Similarly, Robert Boyle, a prominent advocate of the experimental method, held that we also have innate ideas. At the same time, the main continental rationalists (Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz) were also advocates of the empirical \"scientific method\".\nHistory.\nEarly empiricism.\nBetween 600 and 200 BCE, the Vaisheshika school of Hindu philosophy, founded by the ancient Indian philosopher Kanada, accepted perception and inference as the only two reliable sources of knowledge. This is enumerated in his work \"Vai\u015be\u1e63ika S\u016btra\". The Charvaka school held similar beliefs, asserting that perception is the only reliable source of knowledge while inference obtains knowledge with uncertainty.\nThe earliest Western proto-empiricists were the empiric school of ancient Greek medical practitioners, founded in 330 BCE. Its members rejected the doctrines of the dogmatic school, preferring to rely on the observation of \"phantasiai\" (i.e., phenomena, the appearances). The Empiric school was closely allied with the Pyrrhonist school of philosophy, which made the philosophical case for their proto-empiricism. \nThe notion of \"tabula rasa\" (\"clean slate\" or \"blank tablet\") connotes a view of the mind as an originally blank or empty recorder (Locke used the words \"white paper\") on which experience leaves marks. This denies that humans have innate ideas. The notion dates back to Aristotle, :\nAristotle's explanation of how this was possible was not strictly empiricist in a modern sense, but rather based on his theory of potentiality and actuality, and experience of sense perceptions still requires the help of the active \"nous\". These notions contrasted with Platonic notions of the human mind as an entity that pre-existed somewhere in the heavens, before being sent down to join a body on Earth (see Plato's \"Phaedo\" and \"Apology\", as well as others). Aristotle was considered to give a more important position to sense perception than Plato, and commentators in the Middle Ages summarized one of his positions as \"nihil in intellectu nisi prius fuerit in sensu\" (Latin for \"nothing in the intellect without first being in the senses\").\nThis idea was later developed in ancient philosophy by the Stoic school, from about 330 BCE. Stoic epistemology generally emphasizes that the mind starts blank, but acquires knowledge as the outside world is impressed upon it. The doxographer Aetius summarizes this view as \"When a man is born, the Stoics say, he has the commanding part of his soul like a sheet of paper ready for writing upon.\"\nIslamic Golden Age and Pre-Renaissance (5th to 15th centuries CE).\nDuring the Middle Ages (from the 5th to the 15th century CE) Aristotle's theory of \"tabula rasa\" was developed by Islamic philosophers starting with Al Farabi (), developing into an elaborate theory by Avicenna (c.\u2009 980 \u2013 1037 CE) and demonstrated as a thought experiment by Ibn Tufail. For Avicenna (Ibn Sina), for example, the \"tabula rasa\" is a pure potentiality that is actualized through education, and knowledge is attained through \"empirical familiarity with objects in this world from which one abstracts universal concepts\" developed through a \"syllogistic method of reasoning in which observations lead to propositional statements which when compounded lead to further abstract concepts\". The intellect itself develops from a material intellect (\"al-'aql al-hayulani\"), which is a potentiality \"that can acquire knowledge to the active intellect (\"al-'aql al-fa'il\"), the state of the human intellect in conjunction with the perfect source of knowledge\". So the immaterial \"active intellect\", separate from any individual person, is still essential for understanding to occur.\nIn the 12th century CE, the Andalusian Muslim philosopher and novelist Abu Bakr Ibn Tufail (known as \"Abubacer\" or \"Ebu Tophail\" in the West) included the theory of \"tabula rasa\" as a thought experiment in his Arabic philosophical novel, \"Hayy ibn Yaqdhan\" in which he depicted the development of the mind of a feral child \"from a \"tabula rasa\" to that of an adult, in complete isolation from society\" on a desert island, through experience alone. The Latin translation of his philosophical novel, entitled \"Philosophus Autodidactus\", published by Edward Pococke the Younger in 1671, had an influence on John Locke's formulation of \"tabula rasa\" in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\".\nA similar Islamic theological novel, \"Theologus Autodidactus\", was written by the Arab theologian and physician Ibn al-Nafis in the 13th century. It also dealt with the theme of empiricism through the story of a feral child on a desert island, but departed from its predecessor by depicting the development of the protagonist's mind through contact with society rather than in isolation from society.\nDuring the 13th century Thomas Aquinas adopted into scholasticism the Aristotelian position that the senses are essential to the mind. Bonaventure (1221\u20131274), one of Aquinas' strongest intellectual opponents, offered some of the strongest arguments in favour of the Platonic idea of the mind.\nRenaissance Italy.\nIn the late renaissance various writers began to question the medieval and classical understanding of knowledge acquisition in a more fundamental way. In political and historical writing Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli and his friend Francesco Guicciardini initiated a new realistic style of writing. Machiavelli in particular was scornful of writers on politics who judged everything in comparison to mental ideals and demanded that people should study the \"effectual truth\" instead. Their contemporary, Leonardo da Vinci (1452\u20131519) said, \"If you find from your own experience that something is a fact and it contradicts what some authority has written down, then you must abandon the authority and base your reasoning on your own findings.\"\nSignificantly, an empirical metaphysical system was developed by the Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio which had an enormous impact on the development of later Italian thinkers, including Telesio's students Antonio Persio and , his contemporaries Thomas Campanella and Giordano Bruno, and later British philosophers such as Francis Bacon, who regarded Telesio as \"the first of the moderns\". Telesio's influence can also be seen on the French philosophers Ren\u00e9 Descartes and Pierre Gassendi.\nThe decidedly anti-Aristotelian and anti-clerical music theorist Vincenzo Galilei (c. 1520 \u2013 1591), father of Galileo and the inventor of monody, made use of the method in successfully solving musical problems, firstly, of tuning such as the relationship of pitch to string tension and mass in stringed instruments, and to volume of air in wind instruments; and secondly to composition, by his various suggestions to composers in his \"Dialogo della musica antica e moderna\" (Florence, 1581). The Italian word he used for \"experiment\" was \"esperimento\". It is known that he was the essential pedagogical influence upon the young Galileo, his eldest son (cf. Coelho, ed. \"Music and Science in the Age of Galileo Galilei\"), arguably one of the most influential empiricists in history. Vincenzo, through his tuning research, found the underlying truth at the heart of the misunderstood myth of 'Pythagoras' hammers' (the square of the numbers concerned yielded those musical intervals, not the actual numbers, as believed), and through this and other discoveries that demonstrated the fallibility of traditional authorities, a radically empirical attitude developed, passed on to Galileo, which regarded \"experience and demonstration\" as the \"sine qua non\" of valid rational enquiry.\nBritish empiricism.\nBritish empiricism, a retrospective characterization, emerged during the 17th century as an approach to early modern philosophy and modern science. Although both integral to this overarching transition, Francis Bacon, in England, first advocated for empiricism in 1620, whereas Ren\u00e9 Descartes, in France, laid the main groundwork upholding rationalism around 1640. (Bacon's natural philosophy was influenced by Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio and by Swiss physician Paracelsus.) Contributing later in the 17th century, Thomas Hobbes and Baruch Spinoza are retrospectively identified likewise as an empiricist and a rationalist, respectively. In the Enlightenment of the late 17th century, John Locke in England, and in the 18th century, both George Berkeley in Ireland and David Hume in Scotland, all became leading exponents of empiricism, hence the dominance of empiricism in British philosophy. The distinction between rationalism and empiricism was not formally made until Immanuel Kant, in Germany, around 1780, who sought to merge the two views.\nIn response to the early-to-mid-17th-century \"continental rationalism\", John Locke (1632\u20131704) proposed in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" (1689) a very influential view wherein the \"only\" knowledge humans can have is \"a posteriori\", i.e., based upon experience. Locke is famously attributed with holding the proposition that the human mind is a \"tabula rasa\", a \"blank tablet\", in Locke's words \"white paper\", on which the experiences derived from sense impressions as a person's life proceeds are written. \nThere are two sources of our ideas: sensation and reflection. In both cases, a distinction is made between simple and complex ideas. The former are unanalysable, and are broken down into primary and secondary qualities. Primary qualities are essential for the object in question to be what it is. Without specific primary qualities, an object would not be what it is. For example, an apple is an apple because of the arrangement of its atomic structure. If an apple were structured differently, it would cease to be an apple. Secondary qualities are the sensory information we can perceive from its primary qualities. For example, an apple can be perceived in various colours, sizes, and textures but it is still identified as an apple. Therefore, its primary qualities dictate what the object essentially is, while its secondary qualities define its attributes. Complex ideas combine simple ones, and divide into substances, modes, and relations. According to Locke, our knowledge of things is a perception of ideas that are in accordance or discordance with each other, which is very different from the quest for certainty of Descartes.\nA generation later, the Irish Anglican bishop George Berkeley (1685\u20131753) determined that Locke's view immediately opened a door that would lead to eventual atheism. In response to Locke, he put forth in his \"Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge\" (1710) an important challenge to empiricism in which things \"only\" exist either as a \"result\" of their being perceived, or by virtue of the fact that they are an entity doing the perceiving. (For Berkeley, God fills in for humans by doing the perceiving whenever humans are not around to do it.) In his text \"Alciphron\", Berkeley maintained that any order humans may see in nature is the language or handwriting of God. Berkeley's approach to empiricism would later come to be called subjective idealism.\nScottish philosopher David Hume (1711\u20131776) responded to Berkeley's criticisms of Locke, as well as other differences between early modern philosophers, and moved empiricism to a new level of skepticism. Hume argued in keeping with the empiricist view that all knowledge derives from sense experience, but he accepted that this has implications not normally acceptable to philosophers. He wrote for example, \"Locke divides all arguments into demonstrative and probable. On this view, we must say that it is only probable that all men must die or that the sun will rise to-morrow, because neither of these can be demonstrated. But to conform our language more to common use, we ought to divide arguments into demonstrations, proofs, and probabilities\u2014by \u2018proofs\u2019 meaning arguments from experience that leave no room for doubt or opposition.\" And,\nHume divided all of human knowledge into two categories: \"relations of ideas\" and \"matters of fact\" (see also Kant's analytic-synthetic distinction). Mathematical and logical propositions (e.g. \"that the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the two sides\") are examples of the first, while propositions involving some contingent observation of the world (e.g. \"the sun rises in the East\") are examples of the second. All of people's \"ideas\", in turn, are derived from their \"impressions\". For Hume, an \"impression\" corresponds roughly with what we call a sensation. To remember or to imagine such impressions is to have an \"idea\". Ideas are therefore the faint copies of sensations.\nHume maintained that no knowledge, even the most basic beliefs about the natural world, can be conclusively established by reason. Rather, he maintained, our beliefs are more a result of accumulated \"habits\", developed in response to accumulated sense experiences. Among his many arguments Hume also added another important slant to the debate about scientific method\u2014that of the problem of induction. Hume argued that it requires inductive reasoning to arrive at the premises for the principle of inductive reasoning, and therefore the justification for inductive reasoning is a circular argument. Among Hume's conclusions regarding the problem of induction is that there is no certainty that the future will resemble the past. Thus, as a simple instance posed by Hume, we cannot know with certainty by inductive reasoning that the sun will continue to rise in the East, but instead come to expect it to do so because it has repeatedly done so in the past.\nHume concluded that such things as belief in an external world and belief in the existence of the self were not rationally justifiable. According to Hume these beliefs were to be accepted nonetheless because of their profound basis in instinct and custom. Hume's lasting legacy, however, was the doubt that his skeptical arguments cast on the legitimacy of inductive reasoning, allowing many skeptics who followed to cast similar doubt.\nPhenomenalism.\nMost of Hume's followers have disagreed with his conclusion that belief in an external world is \"rationally\" unjustifiable, contending that Hume's own principles implicitly contained the rational justification for such a belief, that is, beyond being content to let the issue rest on human instinct, custom and habit. According to an extreme empiricist theory known as phenomenalism, anticipated by the arguments of both Hume and George Berkeley, a physical object is a kind of construction out of our experiences. \nPhenomenalism is the view that physical objects, properties, events (whatever is physical) are reducible to mental objects, properties, events. Ultimately, only mental objects, properties, events, exist\u2014hence the closely related term subjective idealism. By the phenomenalistic line of thinking, to have a visual experience of a real physical thing is to have an experience of a certain kind of group of experiences. This type of set of experiences possesses a constancy and coherence that is lacking in the set of experiences of which hallucinations, for example, are a part. As John Stuart Mill put it in the mid-19th century, matter is the \"permanent possibility of sensation\".\nMill's empiricism went a significant step beyond Hume in still another respect: in maintaining that induction is necessary for \"all\" meaningful knowledge including mathematics. As summarized by D.W. Hamlin:\nMill's empiricism thus held that knowledge of any kind is not from direct experience but an inductive inference from direct experience. The problems other philosophers have had with Mill's position center around the following issues: Firstly, Mill's formulation encounters difficulty when it describes what direct experience is by differentiating only between actual and possible sensations. This misses some key discussion concerning conditions under which such \"groups of permanent possibilities of sensation\" might exist in the first place. Berkeley put God in that gap; the phenomenalists, including Mill, essentially left the question unanswered. \nIn the end, lacking an acknowledgement of an aspect of \"reality\" that goes beyond mere \"possibilities of sensation\", such a position leads to a version of subjective idealism. Questions of how floor beams continue to support a floor while unobserved, how trees continue to grow while unobserved and untouched by human hands, etc., remain unanswered, and perhaps unanswerable in these terms. Secondly, Mill's formulation leaves open the unsettling possibility that the \"gap-filling entities are purely possibilities and not actualities at all\". Thirdly, Mill's position, by calling mathematics merely another species of inductive inference, misapprehends mathematics. It fails to fully consider the structure and method of mathematical science, the products of which are arrived at through an internally consistent deductive set of procedures which do not, either today or at the time Mill wrote, fall under the agreed meaning of induction.\nThe phenomenalist phase of post-Humean empiricism ended by the 1940s, for by that time it had become obvious that statements about physical things could not be translated into statements about actual and possible sense data. If a physical object statement is to be translatable into a sense-data statement, the former must be at least deducible from the latter. But it came to be realized that there is no finite set of statements about actual and possible sense-data from which we can deduce even a single physical-object statement. The translating or paraphrasing statement must be couched in terms of normal observers in normal conditions of observation. \nThere is, however, no \"finite\" set of statements that are couched in purely sensory terms and can express the satisfaction of the condition of the presence of a normal observer. According to phenomenalism, to say that a normal observer is present is to make the hypothetical statement that were a doctor to inspect the observer, the observer would appear to the doctor to be normal. But, of course, the doctor himself must be a normal observer. If we are to specify this doctor's normality in sensory terms, we must make reference to a second doctor who, when inspecting the sense organs of the first doctor, would himself have to have the sense data a normal observer has when inspecting the sense organs of a subject who is a normal observer. And if we are to specify in sensory terms that the second doctor is a normal observer, we must refer to a third doctor, and so on (also see the third man).\nLogical empiricism.\nLogical empiricism (also \"logical positivism\" or \"neopositivism\") was an early 20th-century attempt to synthesize the essential ideas of British empiricism (e.g. a strong emphasis on sensory experience as the basis for knowledge) with certain insights from mathematical logic that had been developed by Gottlob Frege and Ludwig Wittgenstein. Some of the key figures in this movement were Otto Neurath, Moritz Schlick and the rest of the Vienna Circle, along with A. J. Ayer, Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach.\nThe neopositivists subscribed to a notion of philosophy as the conceptual clarification of the methods, insights and discoveries of the sciences. They saw in the logical symbolism elaborated by Frege (1848\u20131925) and Bertrand Russell (1872\u20131970) a powerful instrument that could rationally reconstruct all scientific discourse into an ideal, logically perfect, language that would be free of the ambiguities and deformations of natural language. This gave rise to what they saw as metaphysical pseudoproblems and other conceptual confusions. By combining Frege's thesis that all mathematical truths are logical with the early Wittgenstein's idea that all logical truths are mere linguistic tautologies, they arrived at a twofold classification of all propositions: the \"analytic\" (\"a priori\") and the \"synthetic\" (\"a posteriori\"). On this basis, they formulated a strong principle of demarcation between sentences that have sense and those that do not: the so-called \"verification principle\". Any sentence that is not purely logical, or is unverifiable, is devoid of meaning. As a result, most metaphysical, ethical, aesthetic and other traditional philosophical problems came to be considered pseudoproblems.\nIn the extreme empiricism of the neopositivists\u2014at least before the 1930s\u2014any genuinely synthetic assertion must be reducible to an ultimate assertion (or set of ultimate assertions) that expresses direct observations or perceptions. In later years, Carnap and Neurath abandoned this sort of \"phenomenalism\" in favor of a rational reconstruction of knowledge into the language of an objective spatio-temporal physics. That is, instead of translating sentences about physical objects into sense-data, such sentences were to be translated into so-called \"protocol sentences\", for example, \"\"X\" at location \"Y\" and at time \"T\" observes such and such\". The central theses of logical positivism (verificationism, the analytic\u2013synthetic distinction, reductionism, etc.) came under sharp attack after World War II by thinkers such as Nelson Goodman, W. V. Quine, Hilary Putnam, Karl Popper, and Richard Rorty. By the late 1960s, it had become evident to most philosophers that the movement had pretty much run its course, though its influence is still significant among contemporary analytic philosophers such as Michael Dummett and other anti-realists.\nPragmatism.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th century, several forms of pragmatic philosophy arose. The ideas of pragmatism, in its various forms, developed mainly from discussions between Charles Sanders Peirce and William James when both men were at Harvard in the 1870s. James popularized the term \"pragmatism\", giving Peirce full credit for its patrimony, but Peirce later demurred from the tangents that the movement was taking, and redubbed what he regarded as the original idea with the name of \"pragmaticism\". Along with its \"pragmatic theory of truth\", this perspective integrates the basic insights of empirical (experience-based) and rational (concept-based) thinking.\nCharles Peirce (1839\u20131914) was highly influential in laying the groundwork for today's empirical scientific method. Although Peirce severely criticized many elements of Descartes' peculiar brand of rationalism, he did not reject rationalism outright. Indeed, he concurred with the main ideas of rationalism, most importantly the idea that rational concepts can be meaningful and the idea that rational concepts necessarily go beyond the data given by empirical observation. In later years he even emphasized the concept-driven side of the then ongoing debate between strict empiricism and strict rationalism, in part to counterbalance the excesses to which some of his cohorts had taken pragmatism under the \"data-driven\" strict-empiricist view.\nAmong Peirce's major contributions was to place inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning in a complementary rather than competitive mode, the latter of which had been the primary trend among the educated since David Hume wrote a century before. To this, Peirce added the concept of abductive reasoning. The combined three forms of reasoning serve as a primary conceptual foundation for the empirically based scientific method today. Peirce's approach \"presupposes that (1) the objects of knowledge are real things, (2) the characters (properties) of real things do not depend on our perceptions of them, and (3) everyone who has sufficient experience of real things will agree on the truth about them. According to Peirce's doctrine of fallibilism, the conclusions of science are always tentative. The rationality of the scientific method does not depend on the certainty of its conclusions, but on its self-corrective character: by continued application of the method science can detect and correct its own mistakes, and thus eventually lead to the discovery of truth\".\nIn his Harvard \"Lectures on Pragmatism\" (1903), Peirce enumerated what he called the \"three cotary propositions of pragmatism\" (L: \"cos, cotis\" whetstone), saying that they \"put the edge on the maxim of pragmatism\". First among these, he listed the peripatetic-thomist observation mentioned above, but he further observed that this link between sensory perception and intellectual conception is a two-way street. That is, it can be taken to say that whatever we find in the intellect is also incipiently in the senses. Hence, if theories are theory-laden then so are the senses, and perception itself can be seen as a species of abductive inference, its difference being that it is beyond control and hence beyond critique\u2014in a word, incorrigible. This in no way conflicts with the fallibility and revisability of scientific concepts, since it is only the immediate percept in its unique individuality or \"thisness\"\u2014what the Scholastics called its \"haecceity\"\u2014that stands beyond control and correction. Scientific concepts, on the other hand, are general in nature, and transient sensations do in another sense find correction within them. This notion of perception as abduction has received periodic revivals in artificial intelligence and cognitive science research, most recently for instance with the work of Irvin Rock on \"indirect perception\".\nAround the beginning of the 20th century, William James (1842\u20131910) coined the term \"radical empiricism\" to describe an offshoot of his form of pragmatism, which he argued could be dealt with separately from his pragmatism\u2014though in fact the two concepts are intertwined in James's published lectures. James maintained that the empirically observed \"directly apprehended universe needs ... no extraneous trans-empirical connective support\", by which he meant to rule out the perception that there can be any value added by seeking supernatural explanations for natural phenomena. James' \"radical empiricism\" is thus \"not\" radical in the context of the term \"empiricism\", but is instead fairly consistent with the modern use of the term \"empirical\". His method of argument in arriving at this view, however, still readily encounters debate within philosophy even today.\nJohn Dewey (1859\u20131952) modified James' pragmatism to form a theory known as instrumentalism. The role of sense experience in Dewey's theory is crucial, in that he saw experience as unified totality of things through which everything else is interrelated. Dewey's basic thought, in accordance with empiricism, was that reality is determined by past experience. Therefore, humans adapt their past experiences of things to perform experiments upon and test the pragmatic values of such experience. The value of such experience is measured experientially and scientifically, and the results of such tests generate ideas that serve as instruments for future experimentation, in physical sciences as in ethics. Thus, ideas in Dewey's system retain their empiricist flavour in that they are only known \"a posteriori\"."}
{"id": "10175", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10175", "title": "Estampie", "text": "The estampie (, Occitan and , ) is a medieval dance and musical form which was a popular instrumental and vocal form in the 13th and 14th centuries. The name was also applied to poetry.\nMusical form.\nThe estampie is similar in form to the lai, consisting of a succession of repeated notes. According to Johannes de Grocheio, there were both vocal and instrumental estampies (for which he used the Latin calque \"stantipes\"), which differed somewhat in form.\nGrocheio calls the sections in both the French vocal and instrumental estampie \"puncta\" (singular \"punctus\"), Each \"puncta\" has a pair of lines that repeat the same melody, in the form:\nThe two statements of the melody in each punctus differ only in their endings, described as \"apertum\" (\"open\") and \"clausum\" (\"closed\") by Grocheio, who believed that six \"puncta\" were standard for the stantipes (his term for the estampie), though he was aware of stantipes with seven \"puncta\". The structure can therefore be diagrammed as:\nIn an instrumental estampie, the open and closed endings of the puncta are the same each time, so that the end of the \"punctum\" serves as the refrain, in the form:\n\"a+x, a+y; b+x, b+y, c+x, c+y, etc.\"\nIn comparison to other dance forms, Grocheio considered the instrumental estampie \"complicated,\" with \"puncta\" of varying lengths This is in contrast to the more regular verse length of the ductia. There are also more \"puncta\" in an estampie than in a ductia. He further states that this difficulty captivates the attention of both the players and listeners because of these complications. According to Grocheio, the vocal estampie begins with a refrain, which is repeated at the end of each stanza, with text and melody independent of the stanza. However, surviving songs do not include a section labeled as a refrain, so some scholars suggest that a convention must have existed for choosing lines to use as a refrain. Like the instrumental form, the vocal dance was complicated enough to require concentration, which helps to distract young people from wicked thoughts.\nHistory.\nThe estampie is the first known genre of medieval era dance music which continues to exist today. The earliest reported example of this musical form is the song \"Kalenda maya\", written by the troubadour Raimbaut de Vaqueiras (1180\u20131207), possibly to a preexisting melody. 14th century examples include \"estampies\" with subtitles such as \"Isabella\" and \"Tre fontane\".\nInstrumentation.\nSources for individual songs do not generally indicate what instruments were used. However, according to Grocheio, the \"vielle\" was the supreme instrument of the period, and the \"stantipes\", together with the cantus coronatus and ductia, were the principal forms played on \"vielles\" before the wealthy in their celebration. Though the estampie is generally monophonic, there are also two-voice compositions in the form of an estampie, such as the two for keyboard in the Robertsbridge Fragment. The French estampie was performed in a lively triple meter, a primary division of three beats to the bar.\nEtymology.\nAccording to the \"OED\", the name comes from the Proven\u00e7al \"estampida\", feminine of \"estampit\", the past participle of \"estampir\" \"to resound\"."}
{"id": "10176", "revid": "1259767733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10176", "title": "Experimental cancer treatment", "text": "Experimental cancer treatments are mainstream medical therapies intended to treat cancer by improving on, supplementing or replacing conventional methods (surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, and immunotherapy). However, researchers are still trying to determine whether these treatments are safe and effective treatments. Experimental cancer treatments are normally available only to people who participate in formal research programs, which are called \"clinical trials\". Occasionally, a seriously ill person may be able to access an experimental drug through an expanded access program. Some of the treatments have regulatory approval for treating other conditions. Health insurance and publicly funded health care programs normally refuse to pay for experimental cancer treatments.\nThe entries listed below vary between theoretical therapies to unproven controversial therapies. Many of these treatments are alleged to help against only specific forms of cancer. It is not a list of treatments widely available at hospitals.\nStudying treatments for cancer.\nThe twin goals of research are to determine whether the treatment actually works (called efficacy) and whether it is sufficiently safe. Regulatory processes attempt to balance the potential benefits with the potential harms, so that people given the treatment are more likely to benefit from it than to be harmed by it.\nMedical research for cancer begins much like research for any disease. In organized studies of new treatments for cancer, the pre-clinical development of drugs, devices, and techniques begins in laboratories, either with isolated cells or in small animals, most commonly rats or mice. In other cases, the proposed treatment for cancer is already in use for some other medical condition, in which case more is known about its safety and potential efficacy.\nClinical trials are the study of treatments in humans. The first-in-human tests of a potential treatment are called Phase I studies. Early clinical trials typically enroll a very small number of patients, and the purpose is to identify major safety issues and the \"maximum tolerated dose\", which is the highest dose that does not produce serious or fatal adverse effects. The dose given in these trials may be far too small to produce any useful effect. In most research, these early trials may involve healthy people, but cancer studies normally enroll only people with relatively severe forms of the disease in this stage of testing. On average, 95% of the participants in these early trials receive no benefit, but all are exposed to the risk of adverse effects. Most participants show signs of optimism bias (the irrational belief that they will beat the odds).\nLater studies, called Phase II and Phase III studies, enroll more people, and the goal is to determine whether the treatment actually works. Phase III studies are frequently randomized controlled trials, with the experimental treatment being compared to the current best available treatment rather than to a placebo. In some cases, the Phase III trial provides the best available treatment to all participants, in addition to some of the patients receiving the experimental treatment.\nBacterial treatments.\nChemotherapeutic drugs have a hard time penetrating tumors to kill them at their core because these cells may lack a good blood supply. Researchers have been using anaerobic bacteria, such as \"Clostridium novyi\", to consume the interior of oxygen-poor tumours. These should then die when they come in contact with the tumor's oxygenated sides, meaning they would be harmless to the rest of the body. A major problem has been that bacteria do not consume all parts of the malignant tissue. However, combining the therapy with chemotherapeutic treatments can help to solve this problem.\nAnother strategy is to use anaerobic bacteria that have been transformed with an enzyme that can convert a non-toxic prodrug into a toxic drug. With the proliferation of the bacteria in the necrotic and hypoxic areas of the tumor, the enzyme is expressed solely in the tumor. Thus, a systemically applied prodrug is metabolised to the toxic drug only in the tumor. This has been demonstrated to be effective with the nonpathogenic anaerobe \"Clostridium sporogenes\".\nDrug therapies.\nHAMLET (human alpha-lactalbumin made lethal to tumor cells).\nHAMLET (human alpha-lactalbumin made lethal to tumor cells) is a molecular complex derived from human breast milk that kills tumor cells by a process resembling programmed cell death (apoptosis). , it had been tested in humans with skin papillomas and bladder cancer.\np53 activation therapy.\nSeveral drug therapies are being developed based on p53, the tumour suppressor gene that protects the cell in response to damage and stress. It is analogous to deciding what to do with a damaged car: p53 brings everything to a halt, and then decides whether to fix the cell or, if the cell is beyond repair, to destroy the cell. This protective function of p53 is disabled in most cancer cells, allowing them to multiply without check. Restoration of p53 activity in tumours (where possible) has been shown to inhibit tumour growth and can even shrink the tumour.\nAs p53 protein levels are usually kept low, one could block its degradation and allow large amounts of p53 to accumulate, thus stimulating p53 activity and its antitumour effects. Drugs that utilize this mechanism include nutlin and MI-219, which are both in phase I clinical trials. , there are also other drugs that are still in the preclinical stage of testing, such as RITA and MITA.\nBI811283.\nBI811283 is a small molecule inhibitor of the aurora B kinase protein being developed by Boehringer Ingelheim for use as an anti-cancer agent. , BI 811283 is currently in the early stages of clinical development and is undergoing first-in-human trials in patients with solid tumors and Acute Myeloid Leukaemia.\nItraconazole.\nItraconazole, sometimes abbreviated ITZ, is an antifungal medication used to treat a number of fungal infections. Recent research works suggest itraconazole (ITZ) could also be used in the treatment of cancer by inhibiting the hedgehog pathway in a similar way to Sonidegib.\nSelective androgen receptor modulators.\nThe majority of breast cancers are androgen receptor (AR) positive and SARMs may help treat these cancers, although promising results have only been obtained with cancers that are both estrogen receptor (ER) positive and AR positive. Anabolic androgenic steroids (AAS) were historically used successfully to treat AR positive breast cancer, but were phased out after the development of anti-estrogen therapies, due to androgenic side effects and concerns about aromatization to estrogen. SARMs have some of the same therapeutic effects as AAS, but fewer side effects, and they cannot be aromatized. Although a trial on AR positive triple negative breast cancer was ended early due to lack of efficacy, ostarine showed benefits in some patients with ER+, AR+ metastatic breast cancer in a phase II study. In patients with more than 40 percent AR positivity as determined by immunohistochemistry, the clinical benefit rate (CBR) was 80 percent and the objective response rate (ORR) was 48 percent\u2014which was considered promising given that the patients had advanced disease and had been heavily pretreated. In 2022, the FDA granted fast track designation to ostarine for AR+, ER+, HER2- metastatic breast cancer. SARMs have also shown antitumor effects in prostate cancer.\nGene therapy.\nIntroduction of tumor suppressor genes into rapidly dividing cells has been thought to slow down or arrest tumor growth. Adenoviruses are a commonly utilized vector for this purpose. Much research has focused on the use of adenoviruses that cannot reproduce, or reproduce only to a limited extent, within the patient to ensure safety via the avoidance of cytolytic destruction of noncancerous cells infected with the vector. However, new studies focus on adenoviruses that can be permitted to reproduce, and destroy cancerous cells in the process, since the adenoviruses' ability to infect normal cells is substantially impaired, potentially resulting in a far more effective treatment.\nAnother use of gene therapy is the introduction of enzymes into these cells that make them susceptible to particular chemotherapy agents; studies with introducing thymidine kinase in gliomas, making them susceptible to aciclovir, are in their experimental stage.\nEpigenetic options.\nEpigenetics is the study of heritable changes in gene activity that are not caused by changes in the DNA sequence, often a result of environmental or dietary damage to the histone receptors within the cell. Current research has shown that epigenetic pharmaceuticals could be a putative replacement or adjuvant therapy for currently accepted treatment methods such as radiation and chemotherapy, or could enhance the effects of these current treatments. It has been shown that the epigenetic control of the proto-onco regions and the tumor suppressor sequences by conformational changes in histones directly affects the formation and progression of cancer. Epigenetics also has the factor of reversibility, a characteristic that other cancer treatments do not offer.\nSome investigators, like Randy Jirtle, PhD, of Duke University Medical Center, think epigenetics may ultimately turn out to have a greater role in disease than genetics.\nTelomerase deactivation therapy.\nBecause most malignant cells rely on the activity of the protein telomerase for their immortality, it has been proposed that a drug that inactivates telomerase might be effective against a broad spectrum of malignancies. At the same time, most healthy tissues in the body express little if any telomerase, and would function normally in its absence. Currently, inositol hexaphosphate, which is available over-the-counter, is undergoing testing in cancer research due to its telomerase-inhibiting abilities.\nA number of research groups have experimented with the use of telomerase inhibitors in animal models, and as of 2005 and 2006 phase I and II human clinical trials are underway. Geron Corporation is currently conducting two clinical trials involving telomerase inhibitors. One uses a vaccine (GRNVAC1) and the other uses a lipidated oligonucleotide (GRN163L).\nRadiation therapies.\nPhotodynamic therapy.\nPhotodynamic therapy (PDT) is generally a non-invasive treatment using a combination of light and a photosensitive drug, such as 5-ALA, Foscan, Metvix, padeliporfin (Tookad, WST09, WST11), Photofrin, or Visudyne. The drug is triggered by light of a specific wavelength.\nHyperthermiatic therapy.\nLocalized and whole-body application of heat has been proposed as a technique for the treatment of malignant tumours. Intense heating will cause denaturation and coagulation of cellular proteins, rapidly killing cells within a tumour.\nMore prolonged moderate heating to temperatures just a few degrees above normal (39.5\u00a0\u00b0C) can cause more subtle changes. A mild heat treatment combined with other stresses can cause cell death by apoptosis. There are many biochemical consequences to the heat shock response within the cell, including slowed cell division and increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation therapy. The purpose of overheating the tumor cells is to create a lack of oxygen so that the heated cells become overacidified, which leads to a lack of nutrients in the tumor. This in turn disrupts the metabolism of the cells so that cell death (apoptosis) can set in. In certain cases chemotherapy or radiation that has previously not had any effect can be made effective. Hyperthermia alters the cell walls by means of so-called heat shock proteins. The cancer cells then react very much more effectively to the cytostatics and radiation. If hyperthermia is used conscientiously it has no serious side effects.\nThere are many techniques by which heat may be delivered. Some of the most common involve the use of focused ultrasound (FUS or HIFU), microwave heating, induction heating, magnetic hyperthermia, and direct application of heat through the use of heated saline pumped through catheters. Experiments with carbon nanotubes that selectively bind to cancer cells have been performed. Lasers are then used that pass harmlessly through the body, but heat the nanotubes, causing the death of the cancer cells. Similar results have also been achieved with other types of nanoparticles, including gold-coated nanoshells and nanorods that exhibit certain degrees of 'tunability' of the absorption properties of the nanoparticles to the wavelength of light for irradiation. The success of this approach to cancer treatment rests on the existence of an 'optical window' in which biological tissue (i.e., healthy cells) are completely transparent at the wavelength of the laser light, while nanoparticles are highly absorbing at the same wavelength. Such a 'window' exists in the so-called near-infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum. In this way, the laser light can pass through the system without harming healthy tissue, and only diseased cells, where the nanoparticles reside, get hot and are killed.\nMagnetic Hyperthermia makes use of magnetic nanoparticles, which can be injected into tumours and then generate heat when subjected to an alternating magnetic field.\nOne of the challenges in thermal therapy is delivering the appropriate amount of heat to the correct part of the patient's body. A great deal of current research focuses on precisely positioning heat delivery devices (catheters, microwave, and ultrasound applicators, etc.) using ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging, as well as of developing new types of nanoparticles that make them particularly efficient absorbers while offering little or no concerns about toxicity to the circulation system. Clinicians also hope to use advanced imaging techniques to monitor heat treatments in real time\u2014heat-induced changes in tissue are sometimes perceptible using these imaging instruments. In magnetic hyperthermia or magnetic fluid hyperthermia method, it will be easier to control temperature distribution by controlling the velocity of ferrofluid injection and size of magnetic nanoparticles.\nNoninvasive cancer heat treatment.\nHeat treatment involves using radio waves to heat up tiny metals that are implanted in cancerous tissue. Gold nanoparticles or carbon nanotubes are the most likely candidate. Promising preclinical trials have been conducted, although clinical trials may not be held for another few years.\nAnother method that is entirely non-invasive referred to as Tumor Treating Fields has already reached clinical trial stage in many countries. The concept applies an electric field through a tumour region using electrodes external to the body. Successful trials have shown the process effectiveness to be greater than chemotherapy and there are no side-effects and only negligible time spent away from normal daily activities. This treatment is still in very early development stages for many types of cancer.\nHigh-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) is still in investigatory phases in many places around the world. In China it has CFDA approval and over 180 treatment centres have been established in China, Hong Kong, and Korea. HIFU has been successfully used to treat cancer to destroy tumours of the bone, brain, breast, liver, pancreas, rectum, kidney, testes, and prostate. Several thousand patients have been treated with various types of tumours. HIFU has CE approval for palliative care for bone metastasis. Experimentally, palliative care has been provided for cases of advanced pancreatic cancer. High-energy therapeutic ultrasound could increase higher-density anti-cancer drug load and nanomedicines to target tumor sites by 20x fold higher than traditional target cancer therapy.\nCold atmospheric plasma treatment.\nCold atmospheric plasma or CAP for has been proposed for the treatment of solid tumors.\nElectromagnetic treatments.\nTumor Treating Fields is a novel FDA-approved cancer treatment therapy that uses alternating electric field to disturb the rapid cell division exhibited by cancer cells.\nComplementary and alternative treatments.\nComplementary and alternative medicine (CAM) treatments are the diverse group of medical and healthcare systems, practices, and products that are not part of conventional medicine and have not been proven to be effective. \"Complementary medicine\" usually refers to methods and substances used along with conventional medicine, while \"alternative medicine\" refers to compounds used instead of conventional medicine. CAM use is common among people with cancer.\nMost complementary and alternative medicines for cancer have not been rigorously studied or tested. Some alternative treatments that have been proven ineffective continue to be marketed and promoted."}
{"id": "10178", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10178", "title": "Ethyne", "text": ""}
{"id": "10179", "revid": "33343951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10179", "title": "Euskara", "text": ""}
{"id": "10181", "revid": "39680754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10181", "title": "Emission", "text": "Emission may refer to:"}
{"id": "10183", "revid": "41042136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10183", "title": "Environmental movement in the United States", "text": "The organized environmental movement is represented by a wide range of non-governmental organizations or NGOs that seek to address environmental issues in the United States. They operate on local, national, and international scales. Environmental NGOs vary widely in political views and in the ways they seek to influence the environmental policy of the United States and other governments.\nThe environmental movement today consists of both large national groups and also many smaller local groups with local concerns. Some resemble the old U.S. conservation movement \u2013 whose modern expression is The Nature Conservancy, Audubon Society and National Geographic Society \u2013 American organizations with a worldwide influence. Increasingly that movement is organized around addressing climate change in the United States alongside interrelated issues like climate justice and broader environmental justice issues.\nScope of the movement.\nAs public awareness and the environmental sciences have improved in recent years, environmental issues have broadened to include key concepts such as \"sustainability\" and also new emerging concerns such as ozone depletion, global warming, acid rain, land use and biogenetic pollution.\nEnvironmental movements often interact or are linked with other social movements, e.g. for peace, human rights, and animal rights; and against nuclear weapons and/or nuclear power, endemic diseases, poverty, hunger, etc.\nSome US colleges are now going green by signing the \"President's Climate Commitment,\" a document that a college President can sign to enable said colleges to practice environmentalism by switching to solar power, etc.\nHistory.\nNative Americans are frequently categorized as \"the original environmentalists\", however this assertion is frequently challenged for being overly simplistic. Early European settlers came to the United States brought from Europe the concept of the commons. In the colonial era, access to natural resources was allocated by individual towns, and disputes over fisheries or land use were resolved at the local level. Changing technologies, however, strained traditional ways of resolving disputes of resource use, and local governments had limited control over powerful special interests. For example, the damming of rivers for mills cut off upriver towns from fisheries; logging and clearing of forest in watersheds harmed local fisheries downstream. In New England, many farmers became uneasy as they noticed clearing of the forest changed stream flows and a decrease in bird population which helped control insects and other pests. These concerns become widely known with the publication of \"Man and Nature\" (1864) by George Perkins Marsh. The environmental impact method of analysis is generally the main mode for determining what issues the environmental movement is involved in. This model is used to determine how to proceed in situations that are detrimental to the environment by choosing the way that is least damaging and has the fewest lasting implications.\nConservation movement.\nConservation first became a national issue during the progressive era's conservation movement (1890s - 1920s). The early national conservation movement shifted emphasis to scientific management which favored larger enterprises and control began to shift from local governments to the states and the federal government.(Judd) Some writers credit sportsmen, hunters and fishermen with the increasing influence of the conservation movement. In the 1870s sportsman magazines such as \"American Sportsmen\", \"Forest and Stream\", and \"Field and Stream\" are seen as leading to the growth of the conservation movement.(Reiger) This conservation movement also urged the establishment of state and national parks and forests, wildlife refuges, and national monuments intended to preserve noteworthy natural features.\nConservation groups focus primarily on an issue that's origins are rooted in general expansion. As industrialization became more prominent as well as the increasing trend towards urbanization the conservative environmental movement began. Contrary to popular belief conservation groups are not against expansion in general, instead, they are concerned with efficiency with resources and land development.\nProgressive era.\nTheodore Roosevelt and his close ally George Bird Grinnell, were motivated by the wanton waste that was taking place at the hand of market hunting. This practice resulted in placing a large number of North American game species on the edge of extinction. Roosevelt recognized that the laissez-faire approach of the U.S. Government was too wasteful and inefficient. In any case, they noted, most of the natural resources in the western states were already owned by the federal government. The best course of action, they argued, was a long-term plan devised by national experts to maximize the long-term economic benefits of natural resources. To accomplish the mission, Roosevelt and Grinnell formed the Boone and Crockett Club in 1887. The club was made up of the best minds and influential men of the day. The Boone and Crockett Club's contingency of conservationists, scientists, politicians, and intellectuals became Roosevelt's closest advisers during his march to preserve wildlife and habitat across North America. As president, Theodore Roosevelt became a prominent conservationist, putting the issue high on the national agenda. He worked with all the major figures of the movement, especially his chief advisor on the matter, Gifford Pinchot. Roosevelt was deeply committed to conserving natural resources and is considered to be the nation's first conservation President. He encouraged the Newlands Reclamation Act of 1902 to promote federal construction of dams to irrigate small farms and placed under federal protection. Roosevelt set aside more Federal land for national parks and nature preserves than all of his predecessors combined.\nRoosevelt established the United States Forest Service, signed into law the creation of five National Parks, and signed the 1906 Antiquities Act, under which he proclaimed 18 new U.S. National Monuments. He also established the first 51 Bird Reserves, four Game Preserves, and 150 National Forests, including Shoshone National Forest, the nation's first. The area of the United States that he placed under public protection totals approximately .\nGifford Pinchot had been appointed by McKinley as chief of Division of Forestry in the Department of Agriculture. In 1905, his department gained control of the national forest reserves. Pinchot promoted private use (for a fee) under federal supervision. In 1907, Roosevelt designated of new national forests just minutes before a deadline.\nIn May 1908, Roosevelt sponsored the Conference of Governors held in the White House, with a focus on natural resources and their most efficient use. Roosevelt delivered the opening address: \"Conservation as a National Duty.\"\nIn 1903 Roosevelt toured the Yosemite Valley with John Muir, who had a very different view of conservation and tried to minimize commercial use of water resources and forests. Working through the Sierra Club he founded, Muir succeeded in 1905 in having Congress transfer the Mariposa Grove and Yosemite Valley to the National Park Service. While Muir wanted nature preserved for the sake of pure beauty, Roosevelt subscribed to Pinchot's formulation, \"to make the forest produce the largest amount of whatever crop or service will be most useful, and keep on producing it for generation after generation of men and trees.\" Muir and the Sierra Club vehemently opposed the damming of the Hetch Hetchy Valley in Yosemite in order to provide water to the city of San Francisco. Roosevelt and Pinchot supported the dam, as did President Woodrow Wilson. The Hetch Hetchy dam was finished in 1923 and is still in operation, but the Sierra Club still wants to tear it down.\nOther influential conservationists of the Progressive Era included George Bird Grinnell (a prominent sportsman who founded the Boone and Crockett Club), the Izaak Walton League and John Muir, the founder of the Sierra Club in 1892. Conservationists organized the National Parks Conservation Association, the Audubon Society, and other groups that still remain active.\nNew Deal.\nFranklin Delano Roosevelt (1933\u201345), like his cousin Theodore Roosevelt, was an ardent conservationist. He used numerous programs of the departments of Agriculture and Interior to end wasteful land-use, mitigate the effects of the Dust Bowl, and efficiently develop natural resources in the West. One of the most popular of all New Deal programs was the Civilian Conservation Corps (1933\u20131943), which sent two million poor young men to work in rural and wilderness areas, primarily on conservation projects.\nPost-1945.\nAfter World War II increasing encroachment on wilderness land evoked the continued resistance of conservationists, who succeeded in blocking a number of projects in the 1950s and 1960s, including the proposed Bridge Canyon Dam that would have backed up the waters of the Colorado River into the Grand Canyon National Park.\nThe Inter-American Conference on the Conservation of Renewable Natural Resources met in 1948 as a collection of nearly 200 scientists from all over the Americans forming the trusteeship principle that:\n\"No generation can exclusively own the renewable resources by which it lives. We hold the commonwealth in trust for prosperity, and to lessen or destroy it is to commit treason against the future\"\nBeginning of the modern movement.\nDuring the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, several events occurred which raised the public awareness of harm to the environment caused by man. In 1954, the 23 man crew of the Japanese fishing vessel \"Lucky Dragon\" was exposed to radioactive fallout from a hydrogen bomb test at Bikini Atoll. By 1969, the public reaction to an ecologically catastrophic oil spill from an offshore well in California's Santa Barbara Channel, Barry Commoner's protest against nuclear testing, along with Rachel Carson's 1962 book \"Silent Spring\", and Paul R. Ehrlich's \"The Population Bomb\" (1968) all added anxiety about the environment. Pictures of Earth from space emphasized that the earth was small and fragile.\nAs the public became more aware of environmental issues, concern about air pollution, water pollution, solid waste disposal, dwindling energy resources, radiation, pesticide poisoning (particularly use of DDT as described in Carson's influential \"Silent Spring\"), noise pollution, and other environmental problems engaged a broadening number of sympathizers. That public support for environmental concerns was widespread became clear in the Earth Day demonstrations of 1970.\nSeveral books after the middle of the 20th century contributed to the rise of American environmentalism (as distinct from the longer-established conservation movement), especially among college and university students and the more literate public. One was the publication of the first textbook on ecology, \"Fundamentals of Ecology,\" by Eugene Odum and Howard Odum, in 1953. Another was the appearance of the Carson's 1962 best-seller \"Silent Spring.\" Her book brought about a whole new interpretation of pesticides by exposing their harmful effects in nature. From this book, many began referring to Carson as the \"mother of the environmental movement\". Another influential development was a 1965 lawsuit, \"Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission,\" opposing the construction of a power plant on Storm King Mountain in New York (state), which is said to have given birth to modern United States environmental law. The wide popularity of \"The Whole Earth Catalogs\", starting in 1968, was quite influential among the younger, hands-on, activist generation of the 1960s and 1970s. Recently, in addition to opposing environmental degradation and protecting wilderness, an increased focus on coexisting with natural biodiversity has appeared, a strain that is apparent in the movement for sustainable agriculture and in the concept of Reconciliation Ecology.\nDuring his time as U.S President, Lyndon Johnson would sign over 300 environment protection measures into law. This was credited as forming the legal basis of the modern environmental movement.\nWilderness preservation.\nIn the modern wilderness preservation movement, important philosophical roles are played by the writings of John Muir who had been activist in the late 19th and early 20th century. Along with Muir perhaps most influential in the modern movement is Henry David Thoreau who published Walden in 1854. Also important was forester and ecologist Aldo Leopold, one of the founders of the Wilderness Society in 1935, who wrote a classic of nature observation and ethical philosophy, \"A Sand County Almanac\", (1949).\nThere is also a growing movement of campers and other people who enjoy outdoor recreation activities to help preserve the environment while spending time in the wilderness.\nAnti-nuclear movement.\nThe anti-nuclear movement in the United States consists of more than 80 anti-nuclear groups that have acted to oppose nuclear power or nuclear weapons, or both, in the United States. These groups include the Abalone Alliance, Clamshell Alliance, Institute for Energy and Environmental Research, Nuclear Information and Resource Service, and Physicians for Social Responsibility. The anti-nuclear movement has delayed construction or halted commitments to build some new nuclear plants, and has pressured the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to enforce and strengthen the safety regulations for nuclear power plants.\nAnti-nuclear protests reached a peak in the 1970s and 1980s and grew out of the environmental movement. Campaigns which captured national public attention involved the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant, Seabrook Station Nuclear Power Plant, Diablo Canyon Power Plant, Shoreham Nuclear Power Plant, and Three Mile Island. On June 12, 1982, one million people demonstrated in New York City's Central Park against nuclear weapons and for an end to the cold war arms race. It was the largest anti-nuclear protest and the largest political demonstration in American history. International Day of Nuclear Disarmament protests were held on June 20, 1983, at 50 sites across the United States.\nThere were many Nevada Desert Experience protests and peace camps at the Nevada Test Site during the 1980s and 1990s.\nMore recent campaigning by anti-nuclear groups has related to several nuclear power plants including the Enrico Fermi Nuclear Power Plant, Indian Point Energy Center, Oyster Creek Nuclear Generating Station, Pilgrim Nuclear Generating Station, Salem Nuclear Power Plant, and Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Plant. There have also been campaigns relating to the Y-12 Nuclear Weapons Plant, the Idaho National Laboratory, proposed Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository, the Hanford Site, the Nevada Test Site, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and transportation of nuclear waste from the Los Alamos National Laboratory.\nSome scientists and engineers have expressed reservations about nuclear power, including: Barry Commoner, S. David Freeman, John Gofman, Arnold Gundersen, Mark Z. Jacobson, Amory Lovins, Arjun Makhijani, Gregory Minor, Joseph Romm and Benjamin K. Sovacool. Scientists who have opposed nuclear weapons include Linus Pauling and Eugene Rabinowitch.\nAntitoxics groups.\nAntitoxics groups are a subgroup that is affiliated with the Environmental Movement in the United States, that is primarily concerned with the effects that cities and their by-products have on humans. This aspect of the movement is a self-proclaimed \"movement of housewives\". Concern around the issues of groundwater contamination and air pollution rose in the early 1980s and individuals involved in antitoxics groups claim that they are concerned for the health of their families.\nA prominent case can be seen in the Love Canal Homeowner's association (LCHA); in this case, a housing development was built on a site that had been used for toxic dumping by the Hooker Chemical Company. As a result of this dumping, the residents had symptoms of skin irritation, Lois Gibbs, a resident of the development, started a grassroots campaign for reparations. Eventual success led to the government having to purchase homes that were sold in the development.\nFederal legislation in the 1970s.\nPrior to the 1970s the protection of basic air and water supplies was a matter mainly left to each state. During the 1970s, the primary responsibility for clean air and water shifted to the federal government. Growing concerns, both environmental and economic, from cities and towns as well as sportsman and other local groups, and senators such as Maine's Edmund S. Muskie, led to the passage of extensive legislation, notably the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972. Other legislation included the 1970 National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), which established the Council on Environmental Quality; the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972; the Endangered Species Act of 1973, the Safe Drinking Water Act (1974), the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (1976), the Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1977, which became known as the Clean Water Act, and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, commonly known as the Superfund Act (1980). These laws regulated public drinking water systems, toxic substances, pesticides, and ocean dumping; and protected wildlife, wilderness, and wild and scenic rivers. Moreover, the new laws provide for pollution research, standard setting, contaminated site cleanup, monitoring, and enforcement.\nThe creation of these laws led to a major shift in the environmental movement. Groups such as the Sierra Club shifted focus from local issues to becoming a lobby in Washington and new groups, for example, the Natural Resources Defense Council and Environmental Defense, arose to influence politics as well. (Larson)\nRenewed focus on local action.\nIn the 1980s, President Ronald Reagan sought to curtail the scope of environmental protection taking steps such as appointing James G. Watt. The major environmental groups responded with mass mailings which led to increased membership and donations.\nWhen industry groups lobbied to weaken regulation and a backlash against environmental regulations, the so-called wise use movement gained importance and influence.(Larson)\nAttacks on environmental activists.\nIn the early 1990s, multiple environmental activists in the United States became targets of arson attacks. In 1991, Greenpeace toxics researcher Pat Costner\u2019s Arkansas home was set on fire, and Maine anti-logging activist Michael Vernon narrowly escaped a similar attack. In October 1993, Leroy Jackson, a Native American environmentalist, was found dead in his van in New Mexico shortly before he was scheduled to testify in Washington, D.C., against the clearcutting of old-growth trees on Navajo land.\n\"Post-environmentalism\".\nIn 2004, with the environmental movement seemingly stalled, some environmentalists started questioning whether \"environmentalism\" was even a useful political framework. According to a controversial essay titled \"The Death of Environmentalism\" (Michael Shellenberger and Ted Nordhaus, 2004) American environmentalism has been remarkably successful in protecting the air, water, and large stretches of wilderness in North America and Europe, but these environmentalists have stagnated as a vital force for cultural and political change.\nShellenberger and Nordhaus wrote, \"Today environmentalism is just another special interest. Evidence for this can be found in its concepts, its proposals, and its reasoning. What stands out is how arbitrary environmental leaders are about what gets counted and what doesn't as 'environmental.' Most of the movement's leading thinkers, funders, and advocates do not question their most basic assumptions about who we are, what we stand for, and what it is that we should be doing.\" Their essay was followed by a speech in San Francisco called \"Is Environmentalism Dead?\" by former Sierra Club President, Adam Werbach, who argued for the evolution of environmentalism into a more expansive, relevant and powerful progressive politics. Werbach endorsed building an environmental movement that is more relevant to average Americans and controversially chose to lead Wal-Mart's effort to take sustainability mainstream.\nThese \"post-environmental movement\" thinkers argue that the ecological crises the human species faces in the 21st century are qualitatively different from the problems the environmental movement was created to address in the 1960s and 1970s. They argue that climate change and habitat destruction are global and more complex, therefore demanding far deeper transformations of the economy, the culture and political life. The consequence of environmentalism's outdated and arbitrary definition, they argue, is a political irrelevancy.\nThese \"politically neutral\" groups tend to avoid global conflicts and view the settlement of inter-human conflict as separate from regard for nature \u2013 in direct contradiction to the ecology movement and peace movement which have increasingly close links: while Green Parties, Greenpeace, and groups like the ACTivist Magazine regard ecology, biodiversity, and an end to non-human extinction as an absolute basis for peace, the local groups may not, and see a high degree of global competition and conflict as justifiable if it lets them preserve their own local uniqueness. However, such groups tend not to \"burn out\" and to sustain for long periods, even generations, protecting the same local treasures.\nLocal groups increasingly find that they benefit from collaboration, e.g. on consensus decision-making methods, or making simultaneous policy, or relying on common legal resources, or even sometimes a common glossary. However, the differences between the various groups that make up the modern environmental movement tend to outweigh such similarities, and they rarely co-operate directly except on a few major global questions. In a notable exception, over 1,000 local groups from around the country united for a single day of action as part of the Step It Up 2007 campaign for real solutions to global warming.\nGroups such as The Bioregional Revolution are calling on the need to bridge these differences, as the converging problems of the 21st century they claim compel the people to unite and to take decisive action. They promote bioregionalism, permaculture, and local economies as solutions to these problems, overpopulation, global warming, global epidemics, and water scarcity, but most notably to \"peak oil\" \u2013 the prediction that the country is likely to reach a maximum in global oil production which could spell drastic changes in many aspects of the residents' everyday lives.\nCriticisms.\nSome people are skeptical of the environmental movement and feel that it is more deeply rooted in politics than science. Although there have been serious debates about climate change and effects of some pesticides and herbicides that mimic animal sex steroids, science has shown that some of the claims of environmentalists have credence.\nNovelist Michael Crichton appeared before the U.S. Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works on September 28, 2005, to address concerns and recommended the employment of double-blind experimentation in environmental research. Crichton suggested that because environmental issues are so political in nature, policymakers need neutral, conclusive data to base their decisions on, rather than conjecture and rhetoric, and double-blind experiments are the most efficient way to achieve that aim.\nA consistent theme acknowledged by both supporters and critics (though more commonly vocalized by critics) of the environmental movement is that we know very little about the Earth we live in. Most fields of environmental studies are relatively new, and therefore what research we have is limited and does not date far enough back for us to completely understand long-term environmental trends. This has led a number of environmentalists to support the use of the precautionary principle in policy-making, which ultimately asserts that we don't know how certain actions may affect the environment and because there is reason to believe they may cause more harm than good we should refrain from such actions.\nElitist.\nIn the December 1994 \"Wild Forest Review,\" Alexander Cockburn and Jeffrey St. Clair wrote \"The mainstream environmental movement was elitist, highly paid, detached from the people, indifferent to the working class, and a firm ally of big government...The environmental movement is now accurately perceived as just another well-financed and cynical special interest group, its rancid infrastructure supported by Democratic Party operatives and millions in grants from corporate foundations.\"\nMany environmental organizations lack diversity, including often white women as the main demographic. However, environmental problems are experienced differently by different social groups, including black versus white groups. For the middle class white population in the US, environmental issues have often included pollution, barriers to recreational activities, etc.. On the other hand, for people of color, environmental issues were often life or death including issues of \"smoke, soot, dust, . . . fumes gases, stench, and carbon monoxide.\" In the past environmental organizations have focused \"on preserving natural resources and endangered species instead of protecting people of color from hazardous waste sites being built in their communities\". When environmental organizations appoint people of color to positions of leadership, the focus will often shift more towards focus on these major, life-threatening issues. However, a significant 2014 State of Diversity in Environmental Organizations study found that the percentage of minorities working for environmental organizations has never exceeded 16% and less than 12% have achieved positions of leadership.\nWilderness myth.\nHistorians have criticized the modern environmental movement for having romantic idealizations of wilderness. William Cronon writes \"wilderness serves as the unexamined foundation on which so many of the quasi-religious values of modern environmentalism rest.\" Cronon claims that \"to the extent that we live in an urban-industrial civilization but at the same time pretend to ourselves that our real home is in the wilderness, to just that extent we give ourselves permission to evade responsibility for the lives we actually lead.\"\nSimilarly Michael Pollan has argued that the wilderness ethic leads people to dismiss areas whose wildness is less than absolute. In his book \"Second Nature,\" Pollan writes that \"once a landscape is no longer 'virgin' it is typically written off as fallen, lost to nature, irredeemable.\"\nDebates within the movement.\nWithin the environmental movement, an ideological debate has taken place between those with an ecocentric viewpoint and an anthropocentric viewpoint. The anthropocentric view has been seen as the conservationist approach to the environment with nature viewed, at least in part, as a resource to be used by man. In contrast to the conservationist approach the ecocentric view, associated with John Muir, Henry David Thoreau and William Wordsworth referred to as the preservationist movement. This approach sees nature in a more spiritual way. Many environmental historians consider the split between John Muir and Gifford Pinchot. During the preservation/conservation debate, the term preservationist becomes to be seen as a pejorative term.\nWhile the ecocentric view focused on biodiversity and wilderness protection the anthropocentric view focuses on urban pollution and social justice. Some environmental writers, for example, William Cronon have criticized the ecocentric view as have a dualist view as a man being separate from nature. Critics of the anthropocentric viewpoint contend that the environmental movement has been taken over by so-called leftist with an agenda beyond environmental protection.\nEnvironmentalism and politics.\nEnvironmentalists gained popularity in American politics after the creation or strengthening of numerous US environmental laws, including the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, and the formation of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 1970. These successes were followed by the enactment of a series of laws regulating waste including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act; Toxic substances, (Toxic Substances Control Act); Pesticides (FIFRA: Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act); clean-up of polluted sites (Superfund); protection of endangered species (Endangered Species Act).\nFewer environmental laws have been passed in the last decade as corporations and other conservative interests have increased their influence over American politics. Corporate cooperation against environmental lobbyists has been organized by the Wise Use group. At the same time, many environmentalists have been turning toward other means of persuasion, such as working with business, community, and other partners to promote sustainable development. Since the 1970s, coalitions and interests groups have directed themselves along the democrat and republican party lines.\nMuch environmental activism is directed towards conservation as well as the prevention or elimination of pollution. However, conservation movements; ecology movements; peace movements; green parties; green- and eco-anarchists often subscribe to very different ideologies, while supporting the same goals as those who call themselves \"environmentalists\". To outsiders, these groups or factions can appear to be indistinguishable.\nAs human population and industrial activity continue to increase, environmentalists often find themselves in serious conflict with those who believe that human and industrial activities should not be overly regulated or restricted, such as some libertarians.\nEnvironmentalists often clash with others, particularly corporate interests, over issues of the management of natural resources, like in the case of the atmosphere as a \"carbon dump\", the focus of climate change, and global warming controversy. They usually seek to protect commonly owned or unowned resources for future generations.\nEnvironmental justice in the United States.\nEnvironmental justice is a movement that began in the U.S. in the 1980s and seeks an end to environmental racism. Environmental justice (EJ) did not come into regular use until 1982 when Warren County, a predominantly African American community, became a site for toxic waste dumping. This sparked protests which eventually led to the arrest of 414 peaceful African American protestors. In 1987, the publication of the United Church of Christ (UCC) Commission for Racial Justice's report \"Toxic Wastes and Race in the United States\" offered the first clear description of environmental racism (ER). ER looks different in different communities, and each context requires distinct policies and actions. Closely related to ER, the environmental justice movement is also grassroots in practice and \"importantly, a movement, which means that it starts and lives with the people\".\nOften, low-income and minority communities are located close to highways, garbage dumps, and factories, where they are exposed to greater pollution and environmental health risk than the rest of the population. The Environmental Justice movement seeks to link \"social\" and \"ecological\" environmental concerns, while at the same time keeping environmentalists conscious of the dynamics in their own movement, i.e. racism, sexism, homophobia, classicism, and other malaises of the dominant culture.\nIn 1991, the First National People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit drafted the 17 principles of environmental justice calling for an \"appreciation of our diverse cultural perspectives\" along with the \"ecological unity and the interdependence of all species, and the right to be free from ecological destruction\". Throughout the EJ movement there has been a focus on everyone being safe from environmental harms including pollution, hazardous wastes, land access, and also the ability of all to participate in decision-making. Over time, the main principle that has developed within the movement is \"We speak for ourselves\" meaning those within the community experiencing the environmental injustice should be the leaders of change.\nEnvironmental rights.\nMany environmental lawsuits turn on the question of who has standing; are the legal issues limited to property owners, or does the general public have a right to intervene? Christopher D. Stone's 1972 essay, \"Should trees have standing?\" seriously addressed the question of whether natural objects themselves should have legal rights, including the right to participate in lawsuits. Stone suggested that there was nothing absurd in this view, and noted that many entities now regarded as having legal rights were, in the past, regarded as \"things\" that were regarded as legally rightless; for example, aliens, children and women. His essay is sometimes regarded as an example of the fallacy of hypostatization.\nOne of the earliest lawsuits to establish that citizens may sue for environmental and aesthetic harms was Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission, decided in 1965 by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. The case helped halt the construction of a power plant on Storm King Mountain in New York State. See also United States environmental law and David Sive, an attorney who was involved in the case.\nConservation biology is an important and rapidly developing field. One way to avoid the stigma of an \"ism\" was to evolve early anti-nuclear groups into the more scientific Green Parties, sprout new NGOs such as Greenpeace and Earth Action, and devoted groups to protecting global biodiversity and preventing global warming and climate change. But in the process, much of the emotional appeal, and many of the original aesthetic goals were lost. Nonetheless, these groups have well-defined ethical and political views, backed by science.\nRadical environmentalism.\nWhile most environmentalists are often mainstream and peaceful, other groups are more radical in their approach. Adherents of radical environmentalism and ecological anarchism are involved in direct action campaigns to protect the environment. Some campaigns have employed controversial tactics including sabotage, blockades, and arson, while most use peaceful protests such as marches, tree sitting, and the like. There is substantial debate within the environmental movement as to the acceptability of these tactics, but almost all environmentalists condemn violent actions that can harm humans.\nClashes by police.\nIn 2023, for the first time in the history of the United States, the police killed an environmental activist during a protest. The protesters were camping in Atlanta's South River Forest, a natural area that the City of Atlanta and Police planned to raze in order to erect a police training facility to be called \"Cop City.\" Police attacked protesters on 18 January 2023. One protester, Tortuguita or, Manuel Esteban P\u00e1ez Ter\u00e1n was killed and seven more were arrested."}
{"id": "10184", "revid": "1271981343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10184", "title": "Environmentalist", "text": "An environmentalist is a person who is concerned with and/or advocates for the protection of the environment. An environmentalist can be considered a supporter of the goals of the environmental movement, \"a political and ethical movement that seeks to improve and protect the quality of the natural environment through changes to environmentally harmful human activities\". An environmentalist is engaged in or believes in the philosophy of environmentalism or one of the related philosophies.\nThe environmental movement has a number of subcommunities, with different approaches and focuses \u2013 each developing distinct movements and identities. Environmentalists are sometimes referred to by critics with informal or derogatory terms such as \"greenie\" and \"tree-hugger\", with some members of the public associating the most radical environmentalists with these derogatory terms.\nTypes.\nThe environmental movement contains a number of subcommunities, that have developed with different approaches and philosophies in different parts of the world. Notably, the early environmental movement experienced a deep tension between the philosophies of conservation and broader environmental protection. In recent decades the rise to prominence of environmental justice, indigenous rights and key environmental crises like the climate crises, has led to the development of other environmentalist identities. Environmentalists can be describe as one of the following:\nClimate activists.\nThe public recognition of the climate crisis and emergence of the climate movement in the beginning of the 21st century led to a distinct group of activists. Activations like the School Strike for Climate and Fridays for Future, have led to a new generation of youth activists like Greta Thunberg, Jamie Margolin and Vanessa Nakate who have created a global youth climate movement.\nConservationists.\nOne notable strain of environmentalism, comes from the philosophy of the conservation movement. Conservationists are concerned with leaving the environment in a better state than the condition they found it distinct from human interaction. The conservation movement is associated with the early parts of the environmental movement of the 19th and 20th century.\nGreens.\nThe adoption of environmentalist into a distinct political ideology led to the development of political parties called \"green parties\", typically with a leftist political approach to overlapping issues of environmental and social wellbeing.\nNotable environmentalists.\nSome of the notable environmentalists who have been active in lobbying for environmental protection and conservation include:\nExtension.\nIn recent years, there have been not only environmentalists for the natural environment but also environmentalists for the human environment. For instance, the activists who call for \"mental green space\" by getting rid of disadvantages of internet, cable TV, and smartphones have been called \"info-environmentalists\"."}
{"id": "10185", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10185", "title": "Environmentalists", "text": ""}
{"id": "10186", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10186", "title": "Eastern Orthodox Church", "text": "The Eastern Orthodox Church, officially the Orthodox Catholic Church, and also called the Greek Orthodox Church or simply the Orthodox Church, is the one of the three major doctrinal and jurisdictional groups of Christianity, with approximately 230 million baptised members. It operates as a communion of autocephalous churches, each governed by its bishops via local synods. The church has no central doctrinal or governmental authority analogous to the pope of the Catholic Church. Nevertheless, the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople is recognised by them as \"primus inter pares\" (\"first among equals\"), a title formerly given to the patriarch of Rome. As one of the oldest surviving religious institutions in the world, the Eastern Orthodox Church has played an especially prominent role in the history and culture of Eastern and Southeastern Europe. Currently, the Eastern Orthodox Church is in the midst of a major ongoing schism between Constantinople and Moscow, with the two not in full communion with each other.\nEastern Orthodox theology is based on the Scriptures and holy tradition, which incorporates the dogmatic decrees of the seven ecumenical councils, and the teaching of the Church Fathers. The church teaches that it is the one, holy, catholic and apostolic church established by Jesus Christ in his Great Commission, and that its bishops are the successors of Christ's apostles. It maintains that it practises the original Christian faith, as passed down by holy tradition. Its patriarchates, descending from the pentarchy, and other autocephalous and autonomous churches, reflect a variety of hierarchical organisation. It recognises seven major sacraments (which are called holy mysteries), of which the Eucharist is the principal one, celebrated liturgically in synaxis. The church teaches that through consecration invoked by a priest, the sacrificial bread and wine become the body and blood of Christ. The Virgin Mary is venerated in the Eastern Orthodox Church as the God-bearer and honoured in devotions.\nThe Churches of Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and Antioch\u2014except for some breaks of communion such as the Photian schism or the Acacian schism\u2014shared communion with the Church of Rome until the East\u2013West Schism in 1054. The 1054 schism was the culmination of mounting theological, political, and cultural disputes, particularly over the authority of the pope, between those churches. Before the Council of Ephesus in AD 431, the Church of the East also shared in this communion, as did the various Oriental Orthodox Churches before the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451, all separating primarily over differences in Christology.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church is the primary religious confession in Russia, Ukraine, Romania, Greece, Belarus, Serbia, Bulgaria, Georgia, Moldova, North Macedonia, Cyprus, and Montenegro. Eastern Orthodox Christians are also one of the main religious groups in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Kosovo, as well as a significant group in Syria, Lebanon, Palestine, and other countries in the Middle East. Roughly half of Eastern Orthodox Christians live in the post Eastern Bloc countries, mostly in Russia. The communities in the former Byzantine regions of North Africa, the Eastern Mediterranean are among the oldest Orthodox communities from the Middle East, which are decreasing due to forced migration driven by increased religious persecution. Eastern Orthodox communities outside Western Asia, Asia Minor, Caucasia and Eastern Europe, including those in North America, Western Europe, and Australia, have been formed through diaspora, conversions, and missionary activity.\nName and characteristics.\nDefinition.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church is defined as the Eastern Christians which recognise the seven ecumenical councils and usually are in communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate, the Patriarchate of Alexandria, the Patriarchate of Antioch, and the Patriarchate of Jerusalem. The Eastern Orthodox churches \"are defined positively by their adherence to the dogmatic definitions of the seven [ecumenical] councils, by the strong sense of not being a sect or a denomination but simply continuing the Christian church, and, despite their varied origins, by adherence to the Byzantine rite\". Those churches are negatively defined by their rejection of papal immediate and universal supremacy.\nThe seven ecumenical councils recognised by the Eastern Orthodox churches are: Nicaea I, Constantinople I, Ephesus, Chalcedon, Constantinople II, Constantinople III, and Nicaea II. Those churches consider the Quinisext Council \"shar[es] the ecumenical authority of Constantinople III. \"By an agreement that appears to be in place in the [Eastern] Orthodox world, possibly the council held in 879 to vindicate the Patriarch Photius will at some future date be recognized as the eighth [ecumenical] council\" by the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nWestern Rite Orthodoxy exists both outside and inside Eastern Orthodoxy. Within Eastern Orthodoxy, it is practised by a vicariate of the Antiochian Orthodox church.\nName.\nIn keeping with the church's teaching on universality and with the Nicene Creed, Eastern Orthodox authorities such as Raphael of Brooklyn have insisted that the full name of the church has always included the term \"Catholic\", as in \"Holy Orthodox Catholic Apostolic Church\".\nThe official name of the Eastern Orthodox Church is the \"Orthodox Catholic Church\". It is the name by which the church refers to itself and which is issued in its liturgical or canonical texts. Eastern Orthodox theologians refer to the church as Catholic. This name and longer variants containing \"Catholic\" are also recognised and referenced in other books and publications by secular or non-Eastern Orthodox writers. The catechism of Philaret (Drozdov) of Moscow published in the 19th century is titled: \"The Longer Catechism of the Orthodox, Catholic, Eastern Church\" ().\nFrom ancient times through the first millennium, Greek was the most prevalent shared language in the demographic regions where the Byzantine Empire flourished, and Greek, being the language in which the New Testament was written, was the primary liturgical language of the church. For this reason, the eastern churches were sometimes identified as \"Greek\" (in contrast to the \"Roman\" or \"Latin\" church, which used a Latin translation of the Bible), even before the Great Schism of 1054. After 1054, \"Greek Orthodox\" or \"Greek Catholic\" marked a church as being in communion with Constantinople, much as \"Catholic\" did for communion with the Catholic Church.\nIn Hungarian, the church is still commonly called \"Eastern Greek\" (). This identification with Greek, however, became increasingly confusing with time. Missionaries brought Eastern Orthodoxy to many regions without ethnic Greeks, where the Greek language was not spoken. In addition, struggles between Rome and Constantinople to control parts of Southeastern Europe resulted in the conversion of some churches to the Catholic Church, which then also used \"Greek Catholic\" to indicate their continued use of the Byzantine rites. Today, only a minority of Eastern Orthodox adherents use Greek as the language of worship.\n\"Eastern\", then, indicates the geographical element in the church's origin and development, while \"Orthodox\" indicates the faith, as well as communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople. There are additional Christian churches in the east that are in communion with neither the Catholic Church nor the Eastern Orthodox Church, who tend to be distinguished by the category named \"Oriental Orthodox\". While the Eastern Orthodox Church continues officially to call itself \"Catholic\", for reasons of universality, the common title of \"Eastern Orthodox Church\" avoids casual confusion with the Catholic Church.\nOrthodoxy.\nThe first known use of the phrase \"the catholic Church\" (\"he katholike ekklesia\") occurred in a letter written about AD 110 from one Greek church to another (Ignatius of Antioch to the Smyrnaeans). The letter states: \"Wheresoever the bishop shall appear, there let the people be, even as where Jesus may be, there is the universal [katholike] Church.\" Thus, almost from the beginning, Christians referred to the Christian Church as the \"one, holy, catholic (from the Greek \u03ba\u03b1\u03b8\u03bf\u03bb\u03b9\u03ba\u03ae, 'according to the whole, universal') and apostolic Church\". The Eastern Orthodox Church claims that it is today the continuation and preservation of that same early church.\nA number of other Christian churches also make a similar claim: the Roman Catholic Church, the Anglican Communion, the Assyrian Church, and the Oriental Orthodox. In the Eastern Orthodox view, the Assyrians and Orientals left the Orthodox Church in the years following the Third Ecumenical Council of Ephesus (431) and the Fourth Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon (451), respectively, in their refusal to accept those councils' Christological definitions. Similarly, the churches in Rome and Constantinople separated in an event known as the East\u2013West Schism, traditionally dated to the year 1054, although it was more a gradual process than a sudden break.\nTo all these churches, the claim to catholicity (universality, oneness with the ancient Church) is important for multiple doctrinal reasons that have more bearing internally in each church than in their relation to the others, now separated in faith. The meaning of holding to a faith that is true is the primary reason why anyone's statement of which church split off from which other has any significance at all; the issues go as deep as the schisms. The depth of this meaning in the Eastern Orthodox Church is registered first in its use of the word \"Orthodox\" itself, a union of Greek \"orthos\" (\"straight\", \"correct\", \"true\", \"right\") and \"doxa\" (\"common belief\", from the ancient verb \u03b4\u03bf\u03ba\u03ad\u03c9-\u03b4\u03bf\u03ba\u1ff6 which is translated \"to believe\", \"to think\", \"to consider\", \"to imagine\", \"to assume\").\nThe dual meanings of \"doxa\", with \"glory\" or \"glorification\" (of God by the church and of the church by God), especially in worship, yield the pair \"correct belief\" and \"true worship\". Together, these express the core of a fundamental teaching about the inseparability of belief and worship and their role in drawing the church together with Christ. All Slavic churches use the title \"Pravoslavie\" (), meaning \"correctness of glorification\", to denote what is in English \"Orthodoxy\", while the Georgians use the title \"Martlmadidebeli\".\nThe term \"Eastern Church\" (the geographic east in the East\u2013West Schism) has been used to distinguish it from western Christendom (the geographic West, which at first came to designate the Catholic communion, later also the various Protestant and Anglican branches). \"Eastern\" is used to indicate that the highest concentrations of the Eastern Orthodox Church presence remain in the eastern part of the Christian world, although it is growing worldwide. Orthodox Christians throughout the world use various ethnic or national jurisdictional titles, or more inclusively, the title \"Eastern Orthodox\", \"Orthodox Catholic\", or simply \"Orthodox\".\nWhat unites Orthodox Christians is the catholic faith as carried through holy tradition. That faith is expressed most fundamentally in scripture and worship, and the latter most essentially through baptism and in the Divine Liturgy.\nThe lines of even this test can blur, however, when differences that arise are not due to doctrine, but to recognition of jurisdiction. As the Eastern Orthodox Church has spread into the west and over the world, the church as a whole has yet to sort out all the inter-jurisdictional issues that have arisen in the expansion, leaving some areas of doubt about what is proper church governance. Moreover, as in the ancient church persecutions, the aftermath of persecutions of Christians in communist nations has complicated some issues of governance that have yet to be completely resolved.\nAll members of the Eastern Orthodox Church profess the same faith, regardless of race or nationality, jurisdiction or local custom, or century of birth. Holy tradition encompasses the understandings and means by which that unity of faith is transmitted across boundaries of time, geography, and culture. It is a continuity that exists only inasmuch as it lives within Christians themselves. It is not static, nor an observation of rules, but rather a sharing of observations that spring both from within and also in keeping with others, even others who lived lives long past. The church proclaims the Holy Spirit maintains the unity and consistency of holy tradition to preserve the integrity of the faith within the church, as given in the scriptural promises.\nOrthodoxy asserts that its shared beliefs, and its theology, exist within holy tradition and cannot be separated from it, and that their meaning is not expressed in mere words alone; that doctrine cannot be understood unless it is prayed; and that it must also be lived in order to be prayed, that without action, the prayer is idle, empty, and in vain, and therefore the theology of demons.\nCatholicity.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church considers itself to be both orthodox and catholic. The doctrine of the Catholicity of the Church, as derived from the Nicene Creed, is essential to Eastern Orthodox ecclesiology. The term \"Catholicity of the Church\" (Greek ) is used in its original sense, as a designation for the universality of the Christian Church, centred around Christ. Therefore, the Eastern Orthodox notion of catholicity is not centred around any singular see, unlike the Catholic Church which has one earthly centre.\nDue to the influence of the Catholic Church in the west, where the English language itself developed, the words \"catholic\" and \"catholicity\" are sometimes used to refer to that church specifically. However, the more prominent dictionary sense given for general use is still the one shared by other languages, implying breadth and universality, reflecting comprehensive scope. In a Christian context, the Christian Church, as identified with the original church founded by Christ and his apostles, is said to be catholic (or universal) in regard to its union with Christ in faith.\nJust as Christ is indivisible, so are union with him and faith in him, whereby the Christian Church is \"universal\", unseparated, and comprehensive, including all who share that faith. Orthodox bishop Kallistos Ware has called that \"simple Christianity\". That is the sense of early and patristic usage wherein the church usually refers to itself as the \"Catholic Church\", whose faith is the \"Orthodox faith\". It is also the sense within the phrase \"one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church\", found in the Nicene Creed, and referred to in Orthodox worship, e.g. in the litany of the catechumens in the Divine Liturgy.\nWith the mutual excommunications of the East\u2013West Schism in 1054, the churches in Rome and Constantinople each viewed the other as having departed from the true church, leaving a smaller but still-catholic church in place. Each retained the \"Catholic\" part of its title, the \"\"Roman\" Catholic Church\" (or Catholic Church) on the one hand, and the \"\"Orthodox\" Catholic Church\" on the other, each of which was defined in terms of inter-communion with either Rome or Constantinople. While the Eastern Orthodox Church recognises what it shares in common with other churches, including the Catholic Church, it sees catholicity in terms of complete union in communion and faith, with the Church throughout all time, and the sharing remains incomplete when not shared fully.\nHistory.\nEarly Church.\nPaul and the Apostles travelled extensively throughout the Roman Empire, including Asia Minor, establishing churches in major communities, with the first churches appearing in Jerusalem and the Holy Land, then in Antioch, Ethiopia, Egypt, Rome, Alexandria, Athens, Thessalonica, Illyricum, and Byzantium, which centuries later would become prominent as the New Rome. Christianity encountered considerable resistance in the Roman Empire, mostly because its adherents refused to comply with the demands of the Roman state\u2014often even when their lives were threatened\u2014by offering sacrifices to the pagan gods. Despite persecution, skepticism, and initial social stigma, the Christian Church spread, particularly following the conversion of Emperor Constantine I in AD 312.\nBy the fourth century, Christianity was present in numerous regions well beyond the Levant. A number of influential schools of thought had arisen, particularly the Alexandrian and Antiochian philosophical approaches. Other groups, such as the Arians, had also managed to gain influence. However, their positions caused theological conflicts within the church, thus prompting the Emperor Constantine to call for a great ecumenical synod in order to define the church's position against the growing, often widely diverging, philosophical and theological interpretations of Christianity. He made it possible for this council to meet not only by providing a location, but by offering to pay for the transportation of all the existing bishops of the church. Most modern Christian churches regard this synod, commonly called the First Council of Nicaea or more generally the First Ecumenical Council, as of major importance.\nEcumenical councils.\nSeveral doctrinal disputes from the fourth century onwards led to the calling of ecumenical councils. In the Orthodox Church, an ecumenical council is the supreme authority that can be invoked to resolve contested issues of the faith. As such, these councils have been held to resolve the most important theological matters that came to be disputed within the Christian Church. Many lesser disagreements were resolved through local councils in the areas where they arose, before they grew significant enough to require an ecumenical council.\nThere are seven councils authoritatively recognised as ecumenical by the Eastern Orthodox Church:\nThere are also two other councils which are considered ecumenical by some Eastern Orthodox:\nOther major councils.\nIn addition to these councils, there have been a number of other significant councils meant to further define the Eastern Orthodox position. They are the Synods of Constantinople, in 1484, 1583, 1755, 1819, and 1872, the Synod of Ia\u0219i in 1642, and the Pan-Orthodox Synod of Jerusalem in 1672. Another council convened in June 2016 to discuss many modern phenomena, other Christian confessions, Eastern Orthodoxy's relation with other religions and fasting disciplines.\nRoman/Byzantine Empire.\nConstantinople is generally considered to be the centre and the \"cradle of Orthodox Christian civilisation\". From the mid-5th century to the early 13th century, Constantinople was the largest and wealthiest city in Europe. Eastern Christian culture reached its golden age during the high point of the Byzantine Empire and continued to flourish in Ukraine and Russia, after the fall of Constantinople. Numerous autocephalous churches were established in Europe: Greece, Georgia, Ukraine, as well as in Russia and Asia.\nIn the 530s the Church of the Holy Wisdom (Hagia Sophia) was built in Constantinople under Emperor Justinian I. Beginning with subsequent Byzantine architecture, Hagia Sophia became the paradigmatic Orthodox church form and its architectural style was emulated by Ottoman mosques a thousand years later. Being the episcopal see of the ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople, it remained the world's largest cathedral for nearly a thousand years, until Seville Cathedral was completed in 1520. Hagia Sophia has been described as \"holding a unique position in the Christian world\", and architectural and cultural icon of Byzantine and Eastern Orthodox civilisation, and it is considered the epitome of Byzantine architecture and is said to have \"changed the history of architecture\".\nEarly schisms.\nThere are the \"Nestorian\" churches resulted from the reaction of the Council of Ephesus (431), which are the earliest surviving Eastern Christian churches that keep the faith of only the first two ecumenical councils, i.e., the First Council of Nicaea (325) and the First Council of Constantinople (381) as legitimate. \"Nestorian\" is an outsider's term for a tradition that predated the influence of Nestorius, the origin of which might lie in certain sections of the School of Antioch or via Nestorius' teachers Theodore of Mopsuestia or Diodore of Tarsus. The modern incarnation of the \"Nestorian Church\" is commonly referred to as \"the Assyrian Church\" or fully as the Assyrian Church of the East.\nThe church in Egypt (Patriarchate of Alexandria) split into two groups following the Council of Chalcedon (451), over a dispute about the relation between the divine and human natures of Jesus. Eventually this led to each group anathematising the other. Those that remained in communion with the other patriarchs (by accepting the Council of Chalcedon) are known today as the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria, where the adjective \"Greek\" refers to their ties to the Greek-speaking culture of the Byzantine Empire.\nThose who disagreed with the findings of the Council of Chalcedon were the majority in Egypt. Today they are known as the Coptic Orthodox Church, having maintained a separate patriarchate. The Coptic Orthodox Church is currently the largest Christian church in Egypt and in the whole Middle East. There was also a similar, albeit smaller scale, split in Syria (Patriarchate of Antioch), which resulted in the separation of the Syriac Orthodox Church from the Byzantine Patriarchate of Antioch.\nThose who disagreed with the Council of Chalcedon are sometimes called \"Oriental Orthodox\" to distinguish them from the \"Eastern Orthodox\", who accepted the Council of Chalcedon. Oriental Orthodox are also sometimes referred to as \"non-Chalcedonians\", or \"anti-Chalcedonians\". The Oriental Orthodox Church denies that it is monophysite and prefers the term \"miaphysite\", to denote the \"united\" nature of Jesus (two natures united into one) consistent with Cyril's theology: \"The term union\u00a0... signifies the concurrence in one reality of those things which are understood to be united\" and \"the Word who is ineffably united with it in a manner beyond all description\" (Cyril of Alexandria, \"On the Unity of Christ\"). This is also defined in the Coptic liturgy, where it is mentioned \"He made it [his humanity] one with his divinity without mingling, without confusion and without alteration\", and \"His divinity parted not from his humanity for a single moment nor a twinkling of an eye.\" They do not accept the teachings of Eutyches, or Eutychianism. Both the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches formally believe themselves to be the continuation of the true church.\nConversion of the South and East Slavs.\nIn the ninth and tenth centuries, Christianity made great inroads into pagan Europe, including Bulgaria (864) and later Kievan Rus' (988). This work was made possible by Cyril and Methodius of Thessaloniki, two brothers chosen by Byzantine emperor Michael III to fulfil the request of Rastislav of Moravia for teachers who could minister to the Moravians in their own language. Cyril and Methodius began translating the divine liturgy, other liturgical texts, and the Gospels along with some other scriptural texts into local languages; with time, as these translations were copied by speakers of other dialects, the hybrid literary language Church Slavonic was created. Originally sent to convert the Slavs of Great Moravia, Cyril and Methodius were forced to compete with Frankish missionaries from the Roman diocese; their disciples were driven out of Great Moravia in AD 886 and emigrated to Bulgaria.\nAfter the Christianisation of Bulgaria in 864, the disciples of Cyril and Methodius in Bulgaria, the most important being Clement of Ohrid and Naum of Preslav, were of great importance to the Orthodox faith in the First Bulgarian Empire. In a short time they managed to prepare and instruct the future Bulgarian clergy into the biblical texts and in AD 870 the Fourth Council of Constantinople granted the Bulgarians the oldest organised autocephalous Slavic Orthodox Church, which shortly thereafter became Patriarchate. The success of the conversion of the Bulgarians facilitated the conversion of the East Slavs. A major event in this effort was the development of the Cyrillic script in Bulgaria, at the Preslav Literary School in the ninth century; this script, along with the liturgical Old Church Slavonic, also called Old Bulgarian, was declared official in Bulgaria in 893.\nThe work of Cyril and Methodius and their disciples had a major impact on the Serbs as well. They accepted Christianity collectively along familial and tribal lines, a gradual process that occurred between the seventh and ninth centuries. In commemoration of their baptisms, each Serbian family or tribe began to celebrate an exclusively Serbian custom called Slava (patron saint) in a special way to honour the saint on whose day they received the sacrament of baptism. It is the most solemn day of the year for all Serbs of the Orthodox faith and has played a role of vital importance in the history of the Serbian people. Slava remains a celebration of the conversion of the Serbian people, which the church blessed and proclaimed a church institution.\nThe missionaries to the East and South Slavs had great success in part because they used the people's native language rather than Greek, the predominant language of the Byzantine Empire, or Latin, as the Roman priests did. Perhaps the greatest legacy of their efforts is the Russian Orthodox Church, which is the largest of the Orthodox churches.\nGreat Schism (1054).\nIn the 11th century, what was recognised as the Great Schism took place between Rome and Constantinople, which led to separation between the Church of the West, the Catholic Church, and the Eastern Byzantine churches, now the Orthodox. There were doctrinal issues like the filioque clause and the authority of the Roman Pope involved in the split, but these were greatly exacerbated by political factors of both Church and state, and by cultural and linguistic differences between Latins and Greeks. Regarding papal supremacy, the Eastern half grew disillusioned with the Pope's centralisation of power, as well as his blatant attempts of excluding the Eastern half in regard to papal approvals. It had previously been the case that the emperor would have a say when a new Pope was elected, but towards the high Middle Ages, the Christians in Rome were slowly consolidating power and removing Byzantine influence. However, even before this exclusionary tendency from the West, well before 1054, the Eastern and Western halves of the Church were in perpetual conflict, particularly during the periods of Eastern iconoclasm and the Photian schism.\nThe final breach is often considered to have arisen after the capture and sacking of Constantinople by the Fourth Crusade in 1204; the final break with Rome occurred circa 1450. The sacking of Church of Holy Wisdom and establishment of the Latin Empire as a seeming attempt to supplant the Orthodox Byzantine Empire in 1204 is viewed with some rancour to the present day. In 2004, Pope John Paul II extended a formal apology for the sacking of Constantinople in 1204, which had also been strongly condemned by the Pope at the time, Innocent III; the apology was formally accepted by Patriarch Bartholomew of Constantinople. However, many items stolen during this time, such as holy relics and riches, are still held in various European cities, particularly Venice.\nReunion was attempted twice, at the 1274 Second Council of Lyon and the 1439 Council of Florence. The Council of Florence briefly reestablished communion between East and West, which lasted until after the fall of Constantinople in 1453. In each case, however, the councils were rejected by the Orthodox people as a whole, and the union of Florence also became very politically difficult after Constantinople came under Ottoman rule. However, in the time since, several local Orthodox Christian churches have renewed union with Rome, known as the Eastern Catholic Churches. Recent decades have seen a renewal of ecumenical spirit and dialogue between the Catholic and Orthodox churches.\nGreek Church under Ottoman rule.\nThe Byzantine Empire never fully recovered from the sack of Constantinople in 1204. Over the next two centuries, it entered a precipitous decline in both territory and influence. In 1453, a much-diminished Byzantine Empire fell to the Ottoman Empire, ending what was once the most powerful state in the Orthodox Christian world, if not in all Christendom. By this time Egypt, another major centre of Eastern Christianity, had been under Muslim control for some seven centuries; most Eastern Orthodox communities across southeastern Europe gradually came under Ottoman rule by the 16th century.\nUnder the Ottomans, the Greek Orthodox Church acquired substantial power as an autonomous \"millet\". The ecumenical patriarch was the religious and administrative ruler of the \"R\u00fbm\", an Ottoman administrative unit meaning \"Roman\", which encompassed all Orthodox subjects of the Empire regardless of ethnicity. While legally subordinate to Muslims and subject to various restrictions, the Orthodox community was generally tolerated until the rise of nationalist movements in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and left to govern its own internal affairs, both religiously and legally. Until the empire's dissolution in the early 20th century, Orthodox Christians would remain the largest non-Muslim minority, and at times among the wealthiest and most politically influential.\nDuring the period 1914\u20131923 in Asia Minor (Anatolia) the Greek genocide took place by the Ottomans. During the Greek genocide, many Orthodox Christians were persecuted and killed. The culmination of the martyrdom was the Asia Minor Catastrophe with the killing of a large number of Orthodox. Among them, 347 clergymen of the Smyrna region and Metropolitan of Smyrna Chrysostomos were tortured and killed. The period 1923\u20131924 was followed by the obligatory population exchange between Greece and Turkey.\nRussian Orthodox Church in the Russian Empire.\nBy the time most Orthodox communities came under Muslim rule in the mid 15th century, Orthodoxy was very strong in Russia, which had maintained close cultural and political ties with the Byzantine Empire; roughly two decades after the fall of Constantinople, Ivan III of Russia married Sophia Palaiologina, a niece of the last Byzantine Emperor Constantine XI, and styled himself Tsar (\"Caesar\") or \"imperator\". In 1547, his grandson Ivan IV, a devout Orthodox Christian, cemented the title as \"Tsar of All Rus\", establishing Russia's first centralised state with divinely appointed rulers. In 1589, the Patriarchate of Constantinople granted autocephalous status to Moscow, the capital of what was now the largest Orthodox Christian polity; the city thereafter referred to itself as the Third Rome \u2014the cultural and religious heir of Constantinople.\nUntil 1666, when Patriarch Nikon was deposed by the tsar, the Russian Orthodox Church had been independent of the State. In 1721, the first Russian Emperor, Peter I, abolished completely the patriarchate and effectively made the church a department of the government, ruled by a most holy synod composed of senior bishops and lay bureaucrats appointed by the Emperor himself. Over time, Imperial Russia would style itself a protector and patron of all Orthodox Christians, especially those within the Ottoman Empire.\nFor nearly 200 years, until the Bolsheviks' October Revolution of 1917, the Russian Orthodox Church remained, in effect, a governmental agency and an instrument of tsarist rule. It was used to varying degrees in imperial campaigns of Russification, and was even allowed to levy taxes on peasants. The church's close ties with the state came to a head under Nicholas I (1825\u20131855), who explicitly made Orthodoxy a core doctrine of imperial unity and legitimacy. The Orthodox faith became further tied to Russian identity and nationalism, while the church was further subordinated to the interests of the state. Consequently, Russian Orthodox Church, along with the imperial regime to which it belonged, came to be presented as an enemy of the people by the Bolsheviks and other Russian revolutionaries.\nEastern Orthodox churches under Communist rule.\nAfter the October Revolution of 1917, part of the clergy of the Russian Orthodox Church fled abroad to escape Bolshevik persecutions, founding an independent church in exile, which reunified with its Russian counterpart in 2007. Some actions against Orthodox priests and believers along with execution included torture, being sent to prison camps, labour camps or mental hospitals. In the first five years after the Bolshevik revolution, 28 bishops and 1,200 priests were executed.\nAfter Nazi Germany's attack on the Soviet Union in 1941, Joseph Stalin revived the Russian Orthodox Church to intensify patriotic support for the war effort. By 1957 about 22,000 Russian Orthodox churches had become active. However, in 1959, Nikita Khrushchev initiated his own campaign against the Russian Orthodox Church and forced the closure of about 12,000 churches. It is estimated that 50,000 clergy had been executed between the revolution and the end of the Khrushchev era. Members of the church hierarchy were jailed or forced out, their places taken by docile clergy, many of whom had ties with the KGB. By 1985 fewer than 7,000 churches remained active.\nAlbania was the only state to have declared itself officially fully atheist. In some other Communist states such as Romania, the Romanian Orthodox Church as an organisation enjoyed relative freedom and even prospered, albeit under strict secret police control. That, however, did not rule out demolishing churches and monasteries as part of broader systematisation (urban planning), and state persecution of individual believers. As an example of the latter, Romania stands out as a country which ran a specialised institution where many Orthodox (along with people of other faiths) were subjected to psychological punishment or torture and mind control experimentation in order to force them give up their religious convictions. However, this was only supported by one faction within the regime, and lasted only three years. The Communist authorities closed down the prison in 1952, and punished many of those responsible for abuses (twenty of them were sentenced to death).\nPost-Communism to 21st century.\nSince the dissolution of the Soviet Union, and the subsequent Fall of Communist governments across the Orthodox world, there has been marked growth in Christian Orthodoxy, particularly in Russia. According to the Pew Research Religion &amp; Public Life Project, between 1991 and 2008, the share of Russian adults identifying as Orthodox Christian rose from 31 per cent to 72 per cent, based on analysis of three waves of data (1991, 1998 and 2008) from the International Social Survey Programme (ISSP), a collaborative effort involving social scientists in about 50 countries.\nPew research conducted in 2017 found a doubling in the global Orthodox population since the early 20th century, with the greatest resurgence in Russia. In the former Soviet Union\u2014where the largest Orthodox communities live\u2014self-identified Orthodox Christians generally report low levels of observance and piety: In Russia, only 6% of Orthodox Christian adults reported attending church at least weekly, 15% say religion is \"very important\" in their lives, and 18% say they pray daily; other former Soviet republics display similarly low levels of religious observance.\nMoscow\u2013Constantinople schisms.\n1996.\nSince 1923, the Orthodox Church of Estonia separated from the Russian Orthodox Church due to the imprisonment of Patriarch Tikhon of Moscow, and the church in the Republic of Estonia falling out of communication with the Russian Church. They petitioned to be placed under direct control of the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, operating as an autonomous church. In 1944 the Soviet Union annexed Estonia and outlawed the Orthodox Church of Estonia, forcefully bringing their churches back under the control of the Moscow Patriarch. However, the church's Primate, Metropolitan Aleksander, fled to Sweden with 21 clergymen and 8,000 followers and established a synod there operating there throughout the Cold War.\nIn 1993, the synod of the Orthodox Church of Estonia in Exile was re-registered and on 20 February 1996, Bartholomew I of Constantinople restored the church's position as subordinate to Constantinople, not Moscow. Patriarch Alexy II of Moscow, who had been born in Estonia, rejected this loss of territory, and severed ties with Patriarch Bartholomew on February 23, removing his name from the diptychs. The two sides would then negotiate in Z\u00fcrich, and a settlement was reached on 16 May 1996. In it, the ethnically Estonian population of Estonia would be under the jurisdiction of the Estonian Apostolic Orthodox Church, while the ethnically Russian population of Estonia would be under the jurisdiction of the Estonian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate. After signing the document the Russian Church restored communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate.\n2018.\nSince the Baptism of Rus' in 867 the Orthodox church in Ukraine was led by the Metropolitan of Kiev and all Rus' who was subordinate to the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople and was largely governed by the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth since the territory was conquered in the Galicia\u2013Volhynia Wars, ending in 1392. Poland-Lithuania lost the territory to Russia as part of the peace deal of the Great Northern War in 1654. In 1686 Dionysius IV of Constantinople transferred the territory to the Patriarch of Moscow and all Rus'. In 1924, Orthodox churches in Ukraine besides the Metropolitan of Kyiv were placed under the jurisdiction of the Polish Orthodox Church by the Ecumenical Patriarch as an autonomous church, however, the Russian Church never agreed to nor recognised this transfer, mostly due to Patriarch Tikhon of Moscow and most of the Russian Church's leaders being imprisoned by Soviet officials. The Soviet Union, initially, had a policy of repression against the Orthodox Church, regardless of its denomination. However, after the start of the Nazi Invasion of the Soviet Union, Joseph Stalin transformed the Russian Church into a propaganda tool to intensify patriotic support for the war effort. Following Soviet victory in the war, various autonomous and Independent Orthodox churches around eastern Europe were forcefully integrated or reintegrated into the Russian Church, including the church in Ukraine. Many of the church's leaders at this time were installed and closely monitored by the NKVD to ensure the church's support for the Soviet Union.\nThis situation led to the rise of rival, anti-Russian and anti-Soviet churches within Ukraine, including the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church (UAOC), founded in 1917 which declared itself the restored autonomous church that existed prior to 1686 but had been eradicated within Soviet Ukraine by the 1930s. The church was largely supported by Ukrainian \u00e9migr\u00e9s and diaspora, and was restored as a legally recognised church by the Ukrainian government in 1991. In 1992, the Ukrainian Orthodox Church \u2013 Kyiv Patriarchate (UOC-KP) came into existence, being founded by members of the Russian Church defrocked for insubordination, alongside support with the Ukrainian \u00e9migr\u00e9 community. The church submitted a request for Ukrainian autocephaly at its founding synod in Kyiv in 1992. These churches were competing with the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (UOC-MP), the Russian Church in Ukraine.\nOn 11 October 2018, the Holy Synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople revoked the Russian Church's letter of issue, allowing them to ordain the Metropolitan of Kyiv, re-established a stauropegion in Kyiv, and lifted the Russian Church's excommunication of members of the UAOC and the UOC-KP. In response, on 15 October, the Holy Synod of the Russian Orthodox Church severed all ties with the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople and barred all members of the Russian Church from receiving communion or sacraments from any churches with ties to the Ecumenical Patriarchate. On 15 December 2018, the UAOC and UOC-KP voted to merge in the Unification council of the Eastern Orthodox churches of Ukraine, forming the restored Orthodox Church of Ukraine, with Epiphanius I of Ukraine, of the UOC-KP, becoming the first primate of the unified church. On 5 January 2019, Bartholomew I signed the official tomos that granted autocephaly to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine.\nIn addition to severing ties with the Ecumenical Patriarchate, the Russian Church has also severed communion with Archbishop Ieronymos II of Athens primate of the Church of Greece, Patriarch Theodore II of Alexandria, and Archbishop Chrysostomos II of Cyprus. In response to the severing of ties with the Ecumenical Patriarchate, the Archdiocese of Russian Orthodox Churches in Western Europe (AROCWE), voted to dissolve itself, although the vote failed, it resulted in a split in AROCWE, with several churches leaving to form the \"Vicariate of Russian Tradition of the Metropolis of France\", while , head of the AROCWE, personally joined the Russian Church. Additionally, during the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the UOC-MP severed all ties with the Russian Church.\nOrganisation and leadership.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church is a fellowship of autocephalous (; \"self-headed\") churches, with the ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople recognised as having \"primus inter pares\" status. The patriarch of Constantinople has the honour of primacy, but his title is only \"first among equals\" and he has no real authority over churches other than the Constantinopolitan church. Rather, his role is limited to defined prerogatives interpreted by the ecumenical patriarch. At times, though, the office of the ecumenical patriarch has been accused of Constantinopolitan or Eastern papism.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church considers Jesus Christ to be the head of the Church and the Church to be his body. It is believed that Church authority and the grace of God is directly passed down to Orthodox bishops and other clergy through the laying on of hands\u2014a practice started by the New Testament apostlesand that this unbroken historical link is an essential element of the true church (; ; ) The Eastern Orthodox Church asserts that apostolic succession requires apostolic faith, and bishops without apostolic faith, who are in heresy, forfeit their claim to apostolic succession. Orthodox churches differentiate themselves from other Christian churches by practising \"ritual and liturgy... rich in mystery and symbolism,\" similar to their views on the sacraments.\nThe Eastern Orthodox communion is organised into several regional churches, which are either autocephalous or lower-ranking autonomous (\"self-governing\") church bodies unified in theology and worship. These include the fourteen autocephalous churches of the Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, Georgia, Cyprus, Bulgaria, Serbia, Russia, Greece, Poland, Romania, Albania, and the Czech Republic and Slovakia, which were officially invited to the Pan-Orthodox Council of 2016; the Orthodox Church in America formed in 1970; the autocephalous Orthodox Church of Ukraine created in 2019; the Macedonian Orthodox Church \u2013 Ohrid Archbishopric, granted autocephaly by the Serbian Orthodox Church in 2022; and a number of autonomous churches. Each church has a ruling bishop and a holy synod to administer its jurisdiction and lead the Eastern Orthodox Church in the preservation and teaching of the apostolic and patristic traditions and church practices.\nEach bishop has a territory (see) over which he governs. His main duty is to make sure the traditions and practices of the Eastern Orthodox Church are preserved. Bishops are equal in authority and cannot interfere in the jurisdiction of another bishop. Administratively, these bishops and their territories are organised into various autocephalous groups or synods of bishops who gather together at least twice each year to discuss the state of affairs within their respective sees. While bishops and their autocephalous synods have the ability to administer guidance in individual cases, their actions do not usually set precedents that affect the entire Eastern Orthodox Church. Bishops are almost always chosen from the monastic ranks and must remain unmarried.\nChurch councils.\nThe ecumenical councils followed a democratic form, with each bishop having one vote. Though present and allowed to speak before the council, members of the Imperial Roman/Byzantine court, abbots, priests, deacons, monks and laymen were not allowed to vote. The primary goal of these great synods was to verify and confirm the fundamental beliefs of the Great Christian Church as truth, and to remove as heresy any false teachings that would threaten the Christian Church. The pope of Rome at that time held the position of \"primus inter pares\" (\"first among equals\") and, while he was not present at any of the councils, he continued to hold this title until the East\u2013West Schism of 1054.\nOther councils have helped to define the Eastern Orthodox position, specifically the Quinisext Council, the Synods of Constantinople, 879\u2013880, 1341, 1347, 1351, 1583, 1819, and 1872, the Synod of Ia\u0219i, 1642, and the Pan-Orthodox Synod of Jerusalem, 1672; the Pan-Orthodox Council, held in Greece in 2016, was the only such Eastern Orthodox council in modern times.\nAccording to Eastern Orthodox teaching the position of \"first among equals\" gives no additional power or authority to the bishop that holds it, but rather that this person sits as organisational head of a council of equals (like a president).\nOne of the decisions made by the First Council of Constantinople (the second ecumenical council, meeting in 381) and supported by later such councils was that the Patriarch of Constantinople should be given equal honour to the Pope of Rome since Constantinople was considered to be the \"New Rome\". According to the third canon of the second ecumenical council: \"Because [Constantinople] is new Rome, the bishop of Constantinople is to enjoy the privileges of honor after the bishop of Rome\".\nThe 28th canon of the fourth ecumenical council clarified this point by stating: \"For the Fathers rightly granted privileges to the throne of Old Rome because it was the royal city. And the One Hundred and Fifty most religious Bishops (i.e. the second ecumenical council in 381) actuated by the same consideration, gave equal privileges to the most holy throne of New Rome, justly judging that the city which is honoured with the Sovereignty and the Senate, and enjoys equal privileges with the old imperial Rome, should in ecclesiastical matters also be magnified as she is.\"\nBecause of the schism, the Eastern Orthodox no longer recognise the primacy of the pope of Rome. The patriarch of Constantinople therefore, like the Pope before him, now enjoys the title of \"first among equals\".\nAdherents.\nThe most reliable estimates currently available number Eastern Orthodox adherents at around 220 million worldwide, making Eastern Orthodoxy the second largest Christian communion in the world after the Catholic Church.\nAccording to the 2015 Yearbook of International Religious Demography, as of 2010, the Eastern Orthodox population was 4% of the global population, declining from 7.1% in 1910. The study also found a decrease in proportional terms, with Eastern Orthodox Christians making up 12.2% of the world's total Christian population in 2015 compared to 20.4% a century earlier. A 2017 report by the Pew Research Center reached similar figures, noting that Eastern Orthodoxy has seen slower growth and less geographic spread than Catholicism and Protestantism, which were driven by colonialism and missionary activity across the world.\nOver two-thirds of all Eastern Orthodox members are concentrated in Southeast Europe, Eastern Europe and Russia, with significant minorities in Central Asia and the Levant. However, Eastern Orthodoxy has become more globalised over the last century, seeing greater growth in Western Europe, the Americas, and parts of Africa; churches are present in the major cities of most countries. Adherents constitute the largest single religious community in Russia\u2014which is home to roughly half the world's Eastern Orthodox Christians\u2014and are the majority in Ukraine, Romania, Belarus, Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria, Moldova, Georgia, North Macedonia, Cyprus, and Montenegro; communities also dominate the disputed territories of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria. Significant Eastern Orthodox minorities exist in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Latvia, Estonia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Albania, Syria, and many other countries.\nEastern Orthodox Christianity is the fastest growing religion in certain Western countries, primarily through labour migration from Eastern Europe, and to a lesser degree conversion. Ireland saw a doubling of its Eastern Orthodox population between 2006 and 2011. Spain and Germany have the largest communities in Western Europe, at roughly 1.5 million each, followed by Italy with around 900,000 and France with between 500,000 and 700,000.\nIn the Americas, four countries have over 100,000 Eastern Orthodox Christians: Canada, Mexico, Brazil, and the United States; all but the latter had fewer than 20,000 at the turn of the 20th century. The U.S. has seen its community more than quadruple since 1910, from 460,000 to 1.8 million as of 2017; consequently, the number of Eastern Orthodox parishes has been growing, with a 16% increase between 2000 and 2010.\nTurkey, which for centuries once had one of the largest Eastern Orthodox communities, saw its overall Christian population fall from roughly one-fifth in 1914 to 2.5% in 1927. This was predominantly due to the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire, which saw most Christian territories become independent nations. The remaining Christian population was reduced further by large-scale genocides against the Armenian, Greek, Assyrian communities; subsequent population exchanges between Greece and Turkey and Bulgaria and Turkey; and associated emigration of Christians to foreign countries (mostly in Europe and the Americas). Today, only 0.2% of Turkey's population represent various Christian denominations (320,000).\nTheology.\nTrinity.\nEastern Orthodox Christians believe in the Trinity, three distinct, divine persons (\"hypostases\"), without overlap or modality among them, who each have the same divine essence (\"ousia\", Greek: \u03bf\u1f50\u03c3\u03af\u03b1)\u2014uncreated, immaterial, and eternal. These three persons are typically distinguished by their relation to each other. The Father is eternal and not begotten and does not proceed from any, the Son is eternal and begotten of the Father, and the Holy Spirit is eternal and proceeds from the Father. Orthodox doctrine regarding the Trinity is summarised in the Nicene Creed.\nEastern Orthodox Christians believe in a monotheistic conception of God (God is only one), which is both transcendent (wholly independent of, and removed from, the material universe) and immanent (involved in the material universe). \nIn discussing God's relationship to his creation, Eastern Orthodox theology distinguishes between God's eternal essence, which is totally transcendent, and his \"uncreated energies\", which is how he reaches humanity. The God who is transcendent and the God who touches mankind are one and the same. That is, these energies are not something that proceed from God or that God produces, but rather they are God himself: distinct, yet inseparable from God's inner being. This view is often called Palamism.\nIn understanding the Trinity as \"one God in three persons\", \"three persons\" is not to be emphasised more than \"one God\", and vice versa. While the three persons are distinct, they are united in one divine essence, and their oneness is expressed in community and action so completely that they cannot be considered separately. For example, their salvation of mankind is an activity engaged in common: \"Christ became man by the good will of the Father and by the cooperation of the Holy Spirit. Christ sends the Holy Spirit who proceeds from the Father, and the Holy Spirit forms Christ in our hearts, and thus God the Father is glorified.\" Their \"communion of essence\" is \"indivisible\". Trinitarian terminology\u2014essence, hypostasis, etc.\u2014are used \"philosophically\", \"to answer the ideas of the heretics\", and \"to place the terms where they separate error and truth.\" The words do what they can do, but the nature of the Trinity in its fullness is believed to remain beyond man's comprehension and expression, a holy mystery that can only be experienced.\nSin, salvation, and the incarnation.\nWhen Eastern Orthodox Christians refer to fallen nature they are not saying that human nature has become evil in itself. Human nature is still formed in the image of God; humans are still God's creation, and God has never created anything evil, but fallen nature remains open to evil intents and actions. It is sometimes said among Eastern Orthodox that humans are \"inclined to sin\"; that is, people find some sinful things attractive. It is the nature of temptation to make sinful things seem the more attractive, and it is the fallen nature of humans that seeks or succumbs to the attraction. Orthodox Christians reject the Augustinian position that the descendants of Adam and Eve are actually guilty of the original sin of their ancestors.\nSince the fall of man, then, it has been mankind's dilemma that no human can restore his nature to union with God's grace; it was necessary for God to effect another change in human nature. Eastern Orthodox Christians believe that Christ Jesus was both God and Man absolutely and completely, having two natures indivisibly: eternally begotten of the Father in his divinity, he was born in his humanity of a woman, Mary, by her consent, through descent of the Holy Spirit. He lived on earth, in time and history, as a man. As a man he also died, and went to the place of the dead, which is Hades. But being God, neither death nor Hades could contain him, and he rose to life again, in his humanity, by the power of the Holy Spirit, thus destroying the power of Hades and of death itself.\nThrough Christ's destruction of Hades' power to hold humanity hostage, he made the path to salvation effective for all the righteous who had died from the beginning of time\u2014saving many, including Adam and Eve, who are remembered in the church as saints.\nResurrection of Christ.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church understands the death and resurrection of Jesus to be real historical events, as described in the gospels of the New Testament.\nChristian life.\nChurch teaching is that Eastern Orthodox Christians, through baptism, enter a new life of salvation through repentance whose purpose is to share in the life of God through the work of the Holy Spirit. The Eastern Orthodox Christian life is a spiritual pilgrimage in which each person, through the imitation of Christ and \"hesychasm\", cultivates the practice of unceasing prayer. Each life occurs within the life of the church as a member of the body of Christ. It is then through the fire of God's love in the action of the Holy Spirit that each member becomes more holy, more wholly unified with Christ, starting in this life and continuing in the next. The church teaches that everyone, being born in God's image, is called to theosis, fulfilment of the image in likeness to God. God the creator, having divinity by nature, offers each person participation in divinity by cooperatively accepting His gift of grace.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church, in understanding itself to be the Body of Christ, and similarly in understanding the Christian life to lead to the unification in Christ of all members of his body, views the church as embracing all Christ's members, those now living on earth, and also all those through the ages who have passed on to the heavenly life. \"In general,\" Eastern Orthodox Christianity sees the Church \"as a purely mystical body, the understanding of which cannot be attained through the development of a rational or natural theology.\"\nThe church includes the Christian saints from all times, and also judges, prophets and righteous Jews of the first covenant, Adam and Eve, even the angels and heavenly hosts. In Eastern Orthodox services, the earthly members together with the heavenly members worship God as one community in Christ, in a union that transcends time and space and joins heaven to earth. This unity of the church is sometimes called the \"communion of the saints\".\nEastern Orthodox Order of Saint Benedict.\nThe Order of Saint Benedict is an affiliation of monastics of the Eastern Orthodox Church who strive to live according to the Rule of St Benedict. The equivalent monastic order in the Catholic Church is known as the Order of Saint Benedict, abbreviated as OSB.\nWithin the United States, the Antiochian Orthodox Archdiocese of North America has at least one Benedictine monastery.\nSeveral Benedictine monastic houses, \"sketes\" and hermitages fit within the Russian Orthodox Church outside of Russia, all of which are \"stavropegial\" directly under the Metropolitan. An oblate programme exists for Orthodox laity Saint Benedict Russian Orthodox Church in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.\nVirgin Mary and other saints.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church believes death and the separation of body and soul to be unnatural\u2014a result of the Fall of Man. They also hold that the congregation of the church comprises both the living and the dead. All persons currently in heaven are considered to be saints, whether their names are known or not. There are, however, those saints of distinction whom God has revealed as particularly good examples. When a saint is revealed and ultimately recognised by a large portion of the church a service of official recognition (glorification) is celebrated.\nThis does not \"make\" the person a saint; it merely recognises the fact and announces it to the rest of the church. A day is prescribed for the saint's celebration, hymns composed and icons created. Numerous saints are celebrated on each day of the year. They are venerated (shown great respect and love) but not worshipped, for worship is due God alone (this view is also held by the Oriental Orthodox and Catholic churches). In showing the saints this love and requesting their prayers, the Eastern Orthodox manifest their belief that the saints thus assist in the process of salvation for others.\nPre-eminent among the saints is the Virgin Mary (commonly referred to as \"Theotokos\" or \"Bogoroditsa\": \"Mother of God\"). In Eastern Orthodox theology, the Mother of God is the fulfilment of the Old Testament archetypes revealed in the Ark of the Covenant (because she carried the New Covenant in the person of Christ) and the burning bush that appeared before Moses (symbolising the Mother of God's carrying of God without being consumed).\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that Christ, from the moment of his conception, was both fully God and fully human. Mary is thus called the \"Theotokos\" or \"Bogoroditsa\" as an affirmation of the divinity of the one to whom she gave birth. It is also believed that her virginity was not compromised in conceiving God-incarnate, that she was not harmed and that she remained forever a virgin. Scriptural references to \"brothers\" of Christ are interpreted as kin, given that the word \"brother\" was used in multiple ways, as was the term \"father\". Due to her unique place in salvation history, Mary is honoured above all other saints and especially venerated for the great work that God accomplished through her.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church regards the bodies of all saints as holy, made such by participation in the holy mysteries, especially the communion of Christ's holy body and blood, and by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit within the church. Indeed, that persons and physical things can be made holy is a cornerstone of the doctrine of the Incarnation, made manifest also directly by God in Old Testament times through his dwelling in the Ark of the Covenant. Thus, physical items connected with saints are also regarded as holy, through their participation in the earthly works of those saints. According to church teaching and tradition, God himself bears witness to this holiness of saints' relics through the many miracles connected with them that have been reported throughout history since biblical times, often including healing from disease and injury.\nEschatology.\nOrthodox Christians believe that when a person dies the soul is temporarily separated from the body. Though it may linger for a short period on Earth, it is ultimately escorted either to paradise (Abraham's bosom) or the darkness of Hades, following the Temporary Judgment. Orthodox do not accept the doctrine of Purgatory, which is held by Catholicism. The soul's experience of either of these states is only a \"foretaste\"\u2014being experienced only by the soul\u2014until the Final Judgment, when the soul and body will be reunited.\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that the state of the soul in Hades can be affected by the love and prayers of the righteous up until the Last Judgment. For this reason the Church offers a special prayer for the dead on the third day, ninth day, fortieth day, and the one-year anniversary after the death of an Orthodox Christian. There are also several days throughout the year that are set aside for general commemoration of the departed, sometimes including nonbelievers. These days usually fall on a Saturday, since it was on a Saturday that Christ lay in the Tomb.\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that after the Final Judgment:\nBible.\nThe official Bible of the Eastern Orthodox Church contains the Septuagint text of the Old Testament, with the Book of Daniel given in the translation by Theodotion. The Patriarchal Text is used for the New Testament. Orthodox Christians hold that the Bible is a verbal icon of Christ, as proclaimed by the 7th ecumenical council. They refer to the Bible as holy scripture, meaning writings containing the foundational truths of the Christian faith as revealed by Christ and the Holy Spirit to its divinely inspired human authors. Holy scripture forms the primary and authoritative written witness of holy tradition and is essential as the basis for all Orthodox teaching and belief.\nOnce established as holy scripture, there has never been any question that the Eastern Orthodox Church holds the full list of books to be venerable and beneficial for reading and study, even though it informally holds some books in higher esteem than others, the four gospels highest of all. Of the subgroups significant enough to be named, the \"Anagignoskomena\" (\u1f00\u03bd\u03b1\u03b3\u03b9\u03b3\u03bd\u03c9\u03c3\u03ba\u03cc\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03b1, \"things that are read\") comprises ten of the Old Testament books rejected in the Protestant canon, but deemed by the Eastern Orthodox worthy to be read in worship services, even though they carry a lesser esteem than the 39 books of the Hebrew canon. The lowest tier contains the remaining books not accepted by either Protestants or Catholics, among them, Psalm 151. Though it is a psalm, and is in the book of psalms, it is not classified as being within the Psalter (the first 150 psalms).\nIn a very strict sense, it is not entirely orthodox to call the holy scripture the \"Word of God\". That is a title the Eastern Orthodox Church reserves for Christ, as supported in the scriptures themselves, most explicitly in the first chapter of the Gospel of John. God's Word is not hollow, like human words. \"God said, 'let there be light'; and there was light.\"\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church does not subscribe to the Protestant doctrine of \"sola scriptura\". The church has defined what Scripture is; it also interprets what its meaning is. Christ promised: \"When He, the Spirit of truth, has come, He will guide you into all truth\".\nScriptures are understood to contain historical fact, poetry, idiom, metaphor, simile, moral fable, parable, prophecy and wisdom literature, and each bears its own consideration in its interpretation. While divinely inspired, the text still consists of words in human languages, arranged in humanly recognisable forms. The Eastern Orthodox Church does not oppose honest critical and historical study of the Bible.\nLiturgy.\nChurch calendar.\nLesser cycles also run in tandem with the annual ones. A weekly cycle of days prescribes a specific focus for each day in addition to others that may be observed.\nChurch services.\nMusic and chanting.\nThe church has developed eight modes or tones (see Octoechos) within which a chant may be set, depending on the time of year, feast day, or other considerations of the Typikon. There are numerous versions and styles that are traditional and acceptable and these vary a great deal between cultures.\nTraditions.\nArt and architecture.\nThe Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity on New York City's Upper East Side is the largest Orthodox Christian church in the Western Hemisphere.\nLocal customs.\nLocality is also expressed in regional terms of churchly jurisdiction, which is often also drawn along national lines. Many Orthodox churches adopt a national title (e.g. Albanian Orthodox, Bulgarian Orthodox, Antiochian Orthodox, Georgian Orthodox, Greek Orthodox, Romanian Orthodox, Russian Orthodox, Serbian Orthodox, Ukrainian Orthodox, etc.) and this title can identify which language is used in services, which bishops preside, and which of the typica is followed by specific congregations. In the Middle East, Orthodox Christians are usually referred to as \"Rum\" (\"Roman\") Orthodox, because of their historical connection with the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire.\nHoly mysteries (sacraments).\nThe Byzantine Rite is used for the administration of the \"Holy mysteries\" or seven sacraments in Eastern Orthodox Christianity; among these are Holy Communion (the most direct connection), baptism, Chrismation, confession, unction, matrimony, and ordination, as well as blessings, exorcisms, and other occasions.\nWhile the Catholic Church numbers seven sacraments, and many Protestant groups list two (baptism and the Eucharist) or even none, the Eastern Orthodox do not limit the number. However, for the sake of convenience, catechisms of the Eastern Orthodox Church will often speak of the \"seven great mysteries\". The term \"sacrament\" also properly applies to other sacred actions such as monastic tonsure or the blessing of holy water, and involves fasting, almsgiving, or an act as simple as lighting a candle, burning incense, praying or asking God's blessing on food.\nBaptism.\nBaptism is the mystery which transforms the old and sinful person into a new and pure one; the old life, the sins, any mistakes made are gone and a clean slate is given. Through baptism a person is united to the Body of Christ by becoming a member of the Eastern Orthodox Church. During the service, water is blessed. The catechumen is fully immersed in the water three times in the name of the Trinity. This is considered to be a death of the \"old man\" by participation in the crucifixion and burial of Christ, and a rebirth into new life in Christ by participation in his resurrection.\nProperly, the mystery of baptism is administered by bishops and priests; however, in emergencies any Eastern Orthodox Christian can baptise.\nChrismation.\nChrismation (sometimes called confirmation) is the mystery by which a baptised person is granted the gift of the Holy Spirit through anointing with Holy Chrism. It is normally given immediately after baptism as part of the same service, but is also used to receive lapsed members of the Eastern Orthodox Church. As baptism is a person's participation in the death and resurrection of Christ, so Chrismation is a person's participation in the coming of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost.\nA baptised and chrismated Eastern Orthodox Christian is a full member of the church and may receive the Eucharist regardless of age.\nThe creation of Chrism may be accomplished by any bishop at any time, but usually is done only once a year, often when a synod of bishops convenes for its annual meeting. Some autocephalous churches get their chrism from others. Anointing with it substitutes for the laying-on of hands described in the New Testament, even when an instrument such as a brush is used.\nHoly Communion (Eucharist).\nHoly Communion is given only to baptised and chrismated Eastern Orthodox Christians who have prepared by fasting, prayer and confession. The priest will administer the gifts with a spoon, called a \"cochlear\", directly into the recipient's mouth from the chalice. From baptism young infants and children are carried to the chalice to receive holy communion.\nMarriage.\nFrom the Eastern Orthodox perspective, marriage is one of the holy mysteries or sacraments. As well as in many other Christian traditions, for example in Catholicism, it serves to unite a woman and a man in eternal union and love before God, with the purpose of following Christ and his Gospel and raising up a faithful, holy family through their holy union. The church understands marriage to be the union of one man and one woman, and certain Orthodox leaders have spoken out strongly in opposition to the civil institution of same-sex marriage.\nJesus said that \"when they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven\" (Mk 12:25). For the Orthodox Christian this passage should not be understood to imply that Christian marriage will not remain a reality in the Kingdom, but points to the fact that relations will not be \"fleshy\", but \"spiritual\". Love between wife and husband, as an icon of relationship between Christ and church, is eternal.\nThe church does recognise that there are rare occasions when it is better that couples do separate, but there is no official recognition of civil divorces. For the Eastern Orthodox, to say that marriage is indissoluble means that it should not be broken, the violation of such a union, perceived as holy, being an offence resulting from either adultery or the prolonged absence of one of the partners. Thus, permitting remarriage is an act of compassion of the church towards sinful man.\nHoly orders.\nWidowed priests and deacons may not remarry and it is common for such members of the clergy to retire to a monastery (see clerical celibacy). This is also true of widowed wives of clergy, who do not remarry and become nuns when their children are grown. Only men are allowed to receive holy orders, although deaconesses had both liturgical and pastoral functions within the church.\nIn 2016, the Holy Synod of the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria voted to reinstate the female diaconate; in the following year, it ordained six sub-deaconesses in the Democratic Republic of Congo. In 2024 the Patriarchate ordained its first female deacon, Angelic Molen, in Zimbabwe, making her the first female deacon in the Eastern Orthodox Church. This move was met with criticism from other autocephalous Orthodox church leaders, such as the Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America's Metropolitan Saba Esber, and Archpriest John Whiteford of the ROCOR, who criticized the move as being politically motivated and did not accurately reflect the historical use of deaconesses in the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nInterfaith relations.\nRelations with other Christians.\nIn 1920, the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, published an encyclical \"addressed 'To all the Churches of Christ, wherever they may be', urging closer co-operation among separated Christians, and suggesting a 'League of Churches', parallel to the newly founded League of Nations\". This gesture was instrumental in the foundation of the World Council of Churches (WCC); as such, almost all Eastern Orthodox churches are members of the WCC and \"Orthodox ecclesiastics and theologians serve on its committees\". Kallistos Ware, a British metropolitan bishop of the Orthodox Church, has stated that ecumenism \"is important for Orthodoxy: it has helped to force the various Orthodox churches out of their comparative isolation, making them meet one another and enter into a living contact with non-Orthodox Christians.\"\nHilarion Alfeyev, then the Metropolitan of Volokolamsk and head of external relations for the Moscow Patriarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church, stated that Orthodox and Evangelical Protestant Christians share the same positions on \"such issues as abortion, the family, and marriage\" and desire \"vigorous grassroots engagement\" between the two Christian communions on such issues.\nIn that regard, the differences between the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox communions have not been improved in any relevant way. Dogmatic and liturgical polarities have been significant, even and especially in recent times. A pertinent point of contention between the monarchically papal, administratively centralised Catholic Church and the decentralised confederation of Orthodox churches is the theological significance of the Virgin Mary. During his visit to Georgia in October 2016, Pope Francis was snubbed by most Orthodox Christians as he led mass before a practically empty Mikheil Meskhi Stadium in Tbilisi.\nThe Oriental Orthodox Churches are not in communion with the Eastern Orthodox Church, despite their similar names. Slow dialogue towards restoring communion between the two churches began in the mid-20th century, and, notably, in the 19th century, when the Greek Patriarch in Egypt had to absent himself from the country for a long period of time; he left his church under the guidance of the Coptic Pope Cyril IV of Alexandria.\nIn 2019, the Primate of the OCU Metropolitan of Kyiv and All Ukraine Epiphanius stated that \"theoretically\" the Orthodox Church of Ukraine and the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church could in the future unite into a united church around the Kyiv throne. In 2019, the Primate of the UGCC, Major Archbishop of Kyiv-Galicia Sviatoslav, stated that every effort should be made to restore the original unity of the Kyivan Church in its Orthodox and Catholic branches, saying that the restoration of Eucharistic communion between Rome and Constantinople is not a utopia.\nNotwithstanding certain overtures by both Catholic and Eastern Orthodox leaders, the majority of Orthodox Christians, as well as Catholics, are not in favour of communion between their churches, with only a median of 35 per cent and 38 per cent, respectively, claiming support.\nRelations with Islam.\nAccording to Bat Ye'or, Christians under Islamic rule were denied equality of rights since they were forced to pay the \"jizya\" poll tax.\nIn 2007, Metropolitan Alfeyev expressed the possibility of peaceful coexistence between Islam and Christianity in Russia, as the two religions have never had religious wars in Russia.\nConstituencies.\nThe various autocephalous and autonomous synods of the Eastern Orthodox Church are distinct in terms of administration and local culture, but for the most part exist in full communion with one another. In addition, some schismatic churches not in any communion exist, with all three groups identifying as Eastern Orthodox.\nAnother group of non-mainstream Eastern Orthodox Christians are referred True Orthodoxy or Old Calendarists; they are those who, without authority from their parent churches, have continued to use the old Julian calendar, and split from their parent church.\nThe Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia (ROCOR) has united in 2007 with the Moscow Patriarchate; these two churches had separated from each other in the 1920s due to the subjection of the latter to the hostile Soviet regime.\nAnother group called the Old Believers, separated in 1666 from the official Russian Orthodox Church as a protest against church rite reforms introduced by Patriarch Nikon of Moscow.\nMain communion.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church is a communion of 15 autocephalous\u2014that is, administratively completely independent\u2014regional churches, plus the Orthodox Church in America and two Ukrainian Orthodox Churches. The Orthodox Church in America is recognised as autocephalous only by the Russian, Bulgarian, Georgian, Polish and Czech-Slovak churches. In December 2018, representatives of two unrecognised Ukrainian Orthodox churches, along with two metropolitans of the recognised, but self-declared autocephalous Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate, proclaimed the formation of the unified Orthodox Church of Ukraine. On 5 January 2019, the Orthodox Church of Ukraine received its \"tomos\" of autocephaly (decree which defines the conditions of a church's independence) from the Ecumenical Patriarchate and thus received a place in the diptych.\nEach church has defined geographical boundaries of its jurisdiction and is ruled by its council of bishops or synod presided by a senior bishop\u2013its primate (or first hierarch). The primate may carry the honorary title of patriarch, metropolitan (in the Slavic tradition) or archbishop (in the Greek tradition).\nEach regional church consists of constituent eparchies (or dioceses) ruled by a bishop. Some churches have given an eparchy or group of eparchies varying degrees of autonomy (self-government). Such autonomous churches maintain varying levels of dependence on their mother church, usually defined in a \"tomos\" or other document of autonomy.\nBelow is a list of the 15 autocephalous Orthodox churches forming the main body of Orthodox Christianity, all of which are titled equal to each other, but the Ecumenical Patriarchate is titled the \"first among equals\". Based on the definitions, the list is in the order of precedence and alphabetical order where necessary, with some of their constituent autonomous churches and exarchates listed as well. The liturgical title of the primate is in italics.\nWithin the main body of Eastern Orthodoxy there are unresolved internal issues as to the autonomous or autocephalous status or legitimacy of the following Orthodox churches, particularly between those stemming from the Russian Orthodox or Constantinopolitan churches:\nTraditionalist groups.\nTrue Orthodox.\nTrue Orthodoxy has been separated from the mainstream communion over issues of ecumenism and calendar reform since the 1920s. The movement rejects the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, the Moscow Patriarchate, and all churches which are in communion with them, accusing them of heresy and placing themselves under bishops who do the same thing. They adhere to the use of the Julian calendar, claiming that the calendar reform in the 1920s is in contradiction with the ecumenical councils. There is no official communion of True Orthodox; and they often are local groups and are limited to a specific bishop or locality.\nOld Believers.\nOld Believers are groups which do not accept the liturgical reforms which were carried out within the Russian Orthodox Church by Patriarch Nikon of Moscow in the 17th century. Although all of the groups of Old Believers emerged as a result of opposition to the Nikonian reforms, they do not constitute a single monolithic body. Despite their emphasis on invariable adherence to the pre-Nikonian traditions, the Old Believers feature a great diversity of groups which profess different interpretations of church tradition and they are often not in communion with each other (some groups even practise re-baptism before admitting a member of another group into their midst).\nChurches not in communion with other churches.\nChurches with irregular or unresolved canonical status are entities that have carried out episcopal consecrations outside of the norms of canon law or whose bishops have been excommunicated by one of the 14 autocephalous churches. These include nationalist and other schismatic bodies such as the Abkhazian Orthodox Church."}
{"id": "10188", "revid": "15195259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10188", "title": "Eastern Orthodox", "text": ""}
{"id": "10189", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10189", "title": "Exobiology", "text": ""}
{"id": "10190", "revid": "48677696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10190", "title": "Eusebius of Nicomedia", "text": "Eusebius of Nicomedia (; ; died 341) was an Arian priest who baptized Constantine the Great on his deathbed in 337. A fifth-century legend evolved that Pope Sylvester I was the one to baptize Constantine, but this is dismissed by scholars as a forgery \"to amend the historical memory of the Arian baptism that the emperor received at the end of his life, and instead to attribute an unequivocally orthodox baptism to him\". He was a bishop of Berytus (modern-day Beirut) in Phoenicia. He was later made the bishop of Nicomedia, where the Imperial court resided. He lived finally in Constantinople from 338 up to his death.\nInfluence in the Imperial family and the Imperial court.\nDistantly related to the imperial family of Constantine the Great, he owed his progression from a less significant Levantine bishopric to the most important episcopal see to his influence at court and the great power he wielded in the church was derived from that source. In fact, during his time in the imperial court, the Eastern court and the major positions in the Eastern Church were held by Arians or Arian sympathizers. With the exception of a short period of eclipse, he enjoyed the confidence both of Constantine and Constantius II. He also served as the tutor of the later Roman emperor Julian, and it was he who might have baptized Constantine the Great on 22 May 337 owing to his familial relationship with the emperor. Also during his time in the imperial court, Arianism became more popular with the royal family. It can be logically surmised that Eusebius had a huge hand in the acceptance of Arianism in the Constantinian household. The Arian influence grew so strong during his tenure in the imperial court that it was not until the end of the Constantinian dynasty and the appointment of Theodosius I that Arianism lost its influence in the empire.\nIt was of particular interest that Eusebius was nearly persecuted because of his close relationship to the Emperor Licinius while serving as bishop of Nicomedia during Licinius' reign.\nRelationship with Arius.\nLike Arius, he was a pupil of Lucian of Antioch, and it is probable that he held the same views as Arius from the very beginning; he was also one of Arius' most fervent supporters who encouraged Arius. It was also because of this relationship that he was the first person whom Arius contacted after the latter was excommunicated from Alexandria by Alexander I of Alexandria in 321. Apparently, Arius and Eusebius were close enough and Eusebius powerful enough that Arius was able to put his theology down in writing. He afterward modified his ideas somewhat, or perhaps he only yielded to the pressure of circumstances; but he was, if not the teacher, at all events the leader and organizer of the Arian council.\nAt the First Council of Nicaea in 325, he signed the Confession, but only after a long and desperate opposition in which he was said to \"subscribe with hand only, not heart\" according to ancient sources. It was a huge blow to the Arian party since it was surmised that the participants in the First Council of Nicaea were evenly split between non-Arians and Arians. His defense of Arius angered the emperor, and a few months after the council he was sent into exile due to his continual contacts with Arius and his followers. After the lapse of three years, he succeeded in regaining the imperial favor by convincing Constantine that Arius and his views do not conflict with the proclaimed Nicene Creed. After his return in 329, he brought the whole machinery of the state government into action in order to impose his views upon the Church. \nPolitical and religious career.\nIn complement to his theological interests, Eusebius was a skilled politician. Upon his return, he regained the lost ground resulting from the First Council of Nicaea, established alliances with other groups such as the Melitians and expelled many opponents.\nHe was described by modern historians as an \"ambitious intriguer\" and a \"consummate political player\". He was also described by ancient sources as a high-handed person who was also aggressive in his dealings; he also used his allies to spy on his opponents.\nHe was able to dislodge and exile three key opponents who espoused the First Council of Nicaea: Eustathius of Antioch in 330, Athanasius of Alexandria in 335 and Marcellus of Ancyra in 336. This was no small feat since Athanasius was regarded as a \"man of God\" by Constantine, and both Eustathius and Athanasius held top positions in the church.\nAnother major feat was his appointment as the Patriarch of Constantinople by expelling Paul I of Constantinople; Paul would eventually return as Patriarch after Eusebius's death.\nEven outside the empire, Eusebius had great influence. He brought Ulfilas into the Arian priesthood and sent the latter to convert the heathen Goths.\nEusebius baptised Constantine the Great in his villa in Nicomedia, on 22 May 337 just before the death of the Emperor.\nDeath and aftermath.\nHe died at the height of his power in the year 341.\nHe was so influential that even after his death, Constantius II heeded his and Eudoxus of Constantinople's advice to attempt to convert the Roman Empire to Arianism by creating Arian Councils and official Arian Doctrines.\nIt was because of Eusebius that \"On the whole, Constantine and his successors made life pretty miserable for Church leaders committed to the Nicene decision and its Trinitarian formula\".\nEusebius of Nicomedia is not to be confused with his contemporary Eusebius, the author of well-known early books of Church history.\nExternal links.\nCorrespondence of Eusebius of Nicomedia:\n "}
{"id": "10191", "revid": "35351935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10191", "title": "Edo", "text": "Edo (), also romanized as Jedo, Yedo or Yeddo, is the former name of Tokyo.\nEdo, formerly a (castle town) centered on Edo Castle located in Musashi Province, became the \"de facto\" capital of Japan from 1603 as the seat of the Tokugawa shogunate. Edo grew to become one of the largest cities in the world under the Tokugawa.\nAfter the Meiji Restoration in 1868 the Meiji government renamed Edo to \"Tokyo\" (, \"Eastern Capital\") and relocated the Emperor from the historic capital of Kyoto to the city. The era of Tokugawa rule in Japan from 1603 to 1868 is known as the Edo period.\nHistory.\nBefore Tokugawa.\nBefore the 10th century, there is no mention of Edo in historical records, but for a few settlements in the area. That name for the area first appears in the Azuma Kagami chronicles, which have probably been used since the second half of the Heian period. Edo's development started in the late 11th century with a branch of the called the coming from the banks of the then-Iruma River, present-day upstream of the Arakawa river. A descendant of the head of the Chichibu clan settled in the area and took the name , likely based on the name used for the place, and founded the Edo clan. Shigetsugu built a fortified residence, probably around the edge of the Musashino Terrace, that would become Edo castle. Shigetsugu's son, , took the Taira's side against Minamoto no Yoritomo in 1180 but eventually surrendered to Minamoto and became a gokenin for the Kamakura shogunate. At the fall of the shogunate in the 14th century, the Edo clan took the side of the Southern Court, and its influence declined during the Muromachi period.\nIn 1456, a vassal of the \u014cgigayatsu branch of the Uesugi clan started to build a castle on the former fortified residence of the Edo clan and took the name \u014cta D\u014dkan. D\u014dkan lived in the castle until his assassination in 1486. Under D\u014dkan, with good water connections to Kamakura, Odawara and other parts of Kanto and the country, Edo expanded as a \"j\u014dkamachi\", with the castle bordering a cove (now Hibiya Park) opening into Edo Bay, and the town developing along the Hirakawa River running into the cove, and on , the stretch of land on the eastern side of the cove (now roughly where Tokyo Station is). Some priests and scholars fleeing Kyoto after the \u014cnin War came to Edo during that period.\nAfter the death of D\u014dkan, the castle became one of strongholds of the Uesugi clan, which fell to the Later H\u014dj\u014d clan at the battle of Takanawahara in 1524, during the expansion of their rule over the Kant\u014d area. When the H\u014dj\u014d clan was finally defeated by Toyotomi Hideyoshi in 1590, the Kanto area was given to rule to Toyotomi's senior officer Tokugawa Ieyasu, who took his residence in Edo.\nTokugawa shogunate.\nTokugawa Ieyasu emerged as the paramount warlord of the Sengoku period following his victory at the Battle of Sekigahara in October 1600. He formally founded the Tokugawa shogunate in 1603 and established his headquarters at Edo Castle. Edo became the center of political power and the \"de facto\" capital of Japan, although the historic capital of Kyoto remained the \"de jure\" capital as the seat of the emperor. Edo grew from a fishing village in Musashi Province in 1457 into the largest metropolis in the world, with an estimated population of 1 million by 1721.\nEdo was repeatedly devastated by fires, the Great Fire of Meireki in 1657 being the most disastrous, with an estimated 100,000 victims and a vast portion of the city completely burnt. The population of Edo was around 300,000, and the impact of the fire was tremendous. The fire destroyed the central keep of Edo Castle, which was never rebuilt, and it influenced the urban planning afterwards to make the city more resilient, with many empty areas to break spreading fires, and wider streets. Reconstruction efforts expanded the city east of the Sumida River, and some \"daimy\u014d\" residences were relocated to give more space to the city, especially in the immediate vicinity of the shogun's residence, creating a large green space beside the castle, now the Fukiage gardens of the Imperial Palace. During the Edo period, there were about 100 major fires, mostly begun by accident and often quickly escalating and spreading through neighborhoods of wooden \"nagaya\" that were heated with charcoal fires.\nIn 1868, the Tokugawa shogunate was overthrown in the Meiji Restoration by supporters of Emperor Meiji and his Imperial Court in Kyoto, ending Edo's status as the \"de facto\" capital of Japan. However, the new Meiji government soon renamed Edo to \"T\u014dky\u014d\" (\u6771\u4eac, \"Eastern Capital\") and the city became the formal capital of Japan when the emperor moved his residence to the city.\nUrbanism.\nVery quickly after its inception, the shogunate undertook major works in Edo that drastically changed the topography of the area, notably under the nationwide program of major civil works involving the now pacified \"daimy\u014d\" workforce. The Hibiya cove facing the castle was soon filled after the arrival of Ieyasu, the Hirakawa river was diverted, and several protective moats and logistical canals were dug (including the Kanda river), to limit the risks of flooding. Landfill works on the bay began, with several areas reclaimed during the duration of the shogunate (notably the Tsukiji area). East of the city and of the Sumida River, a massive network of canals was dug.\nFresh water was a major issue, as direct wells would provide brackish water because of the location of the city over an estuary. The few fresh water ponds of the city were put to use, and a network of canals and underground wooden pipes bringing freshwater from the western side of the city and the Tama River was built. Some of this infrastructure was used until the 20th century.\nGeneral layout of the city.\nThe city was laid out as a castle town around Edo Castle, which was positioned at the tip of the Musashino terrace. The area in the immediate proximity of the castle consisted of samurai and \"daimy\u014d\" residences, whose families lived in Edo as part of the \"sankin-k\u014dtai\" system; the \"daimy\u014d\" made journeys in alternating years to Edo and used the residences for their entourages. The location of each residence was carefully attributed depending on their position as \"tozama\", \"shinpan\" or \"fudai\". It was this extensive organization of the city for the samurai class which defined the character of Edo, particularly in contrast to the two major cities of Kyoto and Osaka, neither of which were ruled by a \"daimy\u014d\" or had a significant samurai population. Kyoto's character was defined by the Imperial Court, the court nobles, its Buddhist temples and its history; Osaka was the country's commercial center, dominated by the \"ch\u014dnin\" or the merchant class. On the contrary, the samurai and \"daimy\u014d\" residences occupied up to 70% of the area of Edo. On the east and northeast sides of the castle lived the including the \"ch\u014dnin\" in a much more densely populated area than the samurai class area, organized in a series of gated communities called \"machi\" (\u753a, \"town\" or \"village\"). This area, Shitamachi (\u4e0b\u753a, \"lower town\" or \"lower towns\"), was the center of urban and merchant culture. Shomin also lived along the main roads leading in and out of the city. The Sumida River, then called the Great River (\u5927\u5ddd, \"\u014ckawa\"), ran on the eastern side of the city. The shogunate's official rice-storage warehouses and other official buildings were located here.\nThe marked the center of the city's commercial center and the starting point of the gokaid\u014d (thus making it the de facto \"center of the country\"). Fishermen, craftsmen and other producers and retailers operated here. Shippers managed ships known as \"tarubune\" to and from Osaka and other cities, bringing goods into the city or transferring them from sea routes to river barges or land routes.\nThe northeastern corner of the city was considered dangerous in the traditional \"onmy\u014dd\u014d\" cosmology and was protected from evil by a number of temples including Sens\u014d-ji and Kan'ei-ji, one of the two tutelary Bodaiji temples of the Tokugawa. A path and a canal, a short distance north of Sens\u014d-ji, extended west from the Sumida riverbank leading along the northern edge of the city to the Yoshiwara pleasure district. Previously located near Ningy\u014dch\u014d, the district was rebuilt in this more remote location after the great fire of Meireki. Danzaemon, the hereditary position head of \"eta,\" or outcasts, who performed \"unclean\" works in the city resided nearby.\nTemples and shrines occupied roughly 15% of the surface of the city, equivalent to the living areas of the townspeople, with however an average of one-tenth of its population. Temples and shrines were spread out over the city. Besides the large concentration in the northeast side to protect the city, the second Bodaiji of the Tokugawa, Z\u014dj\u014d-ji occupied a large area south of the castle.\nHousing.\nMilitary caste.\nThe samurai and \"daimy\u014ds\" residential estates varied dramatically in size depending on their status. Some daimy\u014ds could have several of those residences in Edo. The , was the main residence while the lord was in Edo and was used for official duties. It was not necessarily the largest of his residences, but the most convenient to commute to the castle. The upper residence also acted as the representative embassy of the domain in Edo, connecting the shogunate and the clan. The shogunate did not exercise its investigative powers inside the precincts of the residential estate of the upper residence, which could also act as a refuge. The estate of the upper residence was attributed by the shogunate according to the status of the clan and its relation with the Shogun. The , a bit further from the castle, could house the heir of the lord, his servants from his fief when he was in Edo for the sankin-kotai alternate residency, or be a hiding residence if needed. The , if there was any, was on the outskirts of town, more of a pleasure retreat with gardens. The lower residence could also be used as a retreat for the lord if a fire had devastated the city. Some of the powerful \"daimy\u014ds\" residences occupied vast grounds of several dozens of hectares. Maintenance and operations of those residential estates could be extremely expensive. Samurai in service of a specific clan would normally live in the residence of their lord.\nThe samurais, in direct service of the Shogun, would have their own residences, usually located behind the castle on the Western side in the Banch\u014d area.\nShonin.\nIn a strict sense of the word, \"ch\u014dnin\" were only the townspeople who owned their residence, which was actually a minority. The \"shonin\" population mainly lived in semi-collective housings called , multi-rooms wooden dwellings, organized in enclosed , with communal facilities, such as wells connected to the city's fresh water distribution system, garbage collection area and communal bathrooms. A typical \"machi\" was of rectangular shape and could have a population of several hundred.\nThe \"machi\" had curfew for the night with closing and guarded gates called opening on the in the \"machi\". Two floor buildings and larger shops, reserved to the higher-ranking members of the society, were facing the main street. A \"machi\" would typically follow a grid pattern and smaller streets, , were opening on the main street, also with (sometimes) two-floor buildings, shop on the first floor, living quarter on the second floor, for the more well-off residents. Very narrow streets accessible through small gates called , would enter deeper inside the \"machi\", where single floor \"nagayas\", the were located. Rentals and smaller rooms for lower ranked \"shonin\" were located in those back housings.\nEdo was nicknamed the , depicting the large number and diversity of those communities, but the actual number was closer to 1,700 by the 18th century.\nGovernment and administration.\nEdo's municipal government was under the responsibility of the \"r\u014dj\u016b\", the senior officials who oversaw the entire \"bakufu\" \u2013 the government of the Tokugawa shogunate. The administrative definition of Edo was called .\nThe \"Kanj\u014d-bugy\u014d\" (finance commissioners) were responsible for the financial matters of the shogunate, whereas the \"Jisha-Bugy\u014d\" handled matters related to shrines and temples. The were \"samurai\" (at the very beginning of the shogunate daimy\u014ds, later hatamoto) officials appointed to keep the order in the city, with the word designating both the heading magistrate, the magistrature and its organization. They were in charge of Edo's day-to-day administration, combining the role of police, judge and fire brigade. There were two offices, the South Machi-Bugy\u014d and the North Machi-Bugy\u014d, which had the same geographical jurisdiction in spite of their name but rotated roles on a monthly basis. Despite their extensive responsibilities, the teams of the Machi-Bugy\u014d were rather small, with 2 offices of 125 people each. The Machi-Bugy\u014d did not have jurisdiction over the samurai residential areas, which remained under the shogunate direct rule. The geographical jurisdiction of the Machi-Bugy\u014d did not exactly coincide with the Gofunai, creating some complexity on the handling on the matters of the city. The Machi-bugy\u014d oversaw the numerous Machi where shonin lived through representatives called . Each Machi had a Machi leader called , who reported to a who himself was in charge of several Machis."}
{"id": "10192", "revid": "712163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10192", "title": "Explosive", "text": " \nAn explosive (or explosive material) is a reactive substance that contains a great amount of potential energy that can produce an explosion if released suddenly, usually accompanied by the production of light, heat, sound, and pressure. An explosive charge is a measured quantity of explosive material, which may either be composed solely of one ingredient or be a mixture containing at least two substances.\nThe potential energy stored in an explosive material may, for example, be:\nExplosive materials may be categorized by the speed at which they expand. Materials that detonate (the front of the chemical reaction moves faster through the material than the speed of sound) are said to be \"high explosives\" and materials that deflagrate are said to be \"low explosives\". Explosives may also be categorized by their sensitivity. Sensitive materials that can be initiated by a relatively small amount of heat or pressure are primary explosives and materials that are relatively insensitive are secondary or tertiary explosives.\nA wide variety of chemicals can explode; a smaller number are manufactured specifically for the purpose of being used as explosives. The remainder are too dangerous, sensitive, toxic, expensive, unstable, or prone to decomposition or degradation over short time spans.\nIn contrast, some materials are merely combustible or flammable if they burn without exploding.\nThe distinction, however, is not very clear. Certain materials\u2014dusts, powders, gases, or volatile organic liquids\u2014may be simply combustible or flammable under ordinary conditions, but become explosive in specific situations or forms, such as dispersed airborne clouds, or confinement or sudden release.\nHistory.\nEarly thermal weapons, such as Greek fire, have existed since ancient times. At its roots, the history of chemical explosives lies in the history of gunpowder. During the Tang dynasty in the 9th century, Taoist Chinese alchemists were eagerly trying to find the elixir of immortality. In the process, they stumbled upon the explosive invention of black powder made from coal, saltpeter, and sulfur in 1044. Gunpowder was the first form of chemical explosives and by 1161, the Chinese were using explosives for the first time in warfare. The Chinese would incorporate explosives fired from bamboo or bronze tubes known as bamboo firecrackers. The Chinese also inserted live rats inside the bamboo firecrackers; when fired toward the enemy, the flaming rats created great psychological ramifications\u2014scaring enemy soldiers away and causing cavalry units to go wild.\nThe first useful explosive stronger than black powder was nitroglycerin, developed in 1847. Since nitroglycerin is a liquid and highly unstable, it was replaced by nitrocellulose, trinitrotoluene (TNT) in 1863, smokeless powder, dynamite in 1867 and gelignite (the latter two being sophisticated stabilized preparations of nitroglycerin rather than chemical alternatives, both invented by Alfred Nobel). World War I saw the adoption of TNT in artillery shells. World War II saw extensive use of new explosives .\nIn turn, these have largely been replaced by more powerful explosives such as C-4 and PETN. However, C-4 and PETN react with metal and catch fire easily, yet unlike TNT, C-4 and PETN are waterproof and malleable.\nApplications.\nCommercial.\nThe largest commercial application of explosives is mining. Whether the mine is on the surface or is buried underground, the detonation or deflagration of either a high or low explosive in a confined space can be used to liberate a fairly specific sub-volume of a brittle material (rock) in a much larger volume of the same or similar material. The mining industry tends to use nitrate-based explosives such as emulsions of fuel oil and ammonium nitrate solutions, mixtures of ammonium nitrate prills (fertilizer pellets) and fuel oil (ANFO) and gelatinous suspensions or slurries of ammonium nitrate and combustible fuels.\nIn materials science and engineering, explosives are used in cladding (explosion welding). A thin plate of some material is placed atop a thick layer of a different material, both layers typically of metal. Atop the thin layer is placed an explosive. At one end of the layer of explosive, the explosion is initiated. The two metallic layers are forced together at high speed and with great force. The explosion spreads from the initiation site throughout the explosive. Ideally, this produces a metallurgical bond between the two layers.\nAs the length of time the shock wave spends at any point is small, we can see mixing of the two metals and their surface chemistries, through some fraction of the depth, and they tend to be mixed in some way. It is possible that some fraction of the surface material from either layer eventually gets ejected when the end of material is reached. Hence, the mass of the now \"welded\" bilayer, may be less than the sum of the masses of the two initial layers.\nThere are applications where a shock wave, and electrostatics, can result in high velocity projectiles such as in an electrostatic particle accelerator.\nTypes.\nChemical.\nAn explosion is a type of spontaneous chemical reaction that, once initiated, is driven by both a large exothermic change (great release of heat) and a large positive entropy change (great quantities of gases are released) in going from reactants to products, thereby constituting a thermodynamically favorable process in addition to one that propagates very rapidly. Thus, explosives are substances that contain a large amount of energy stored in chemical bonds. The energetic stability of the gaseous products and hence their generation comes from the formation of strongly bonded species like carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen gas, which contain strong double and triple bonds having bond strengths of nearly 1 MJ/mole. Consequently, most commercial explosives are organic compounds containing \u2013NO2, \u2013ONO2 and \u2013NHNO2 groups that, when detonated, release gases like the aforementioned (e.g., nitroglycerin, TNT, HMX, PETN, nitrocellulose).\nAn explosive is classified as a low or high explosive according to its rate of combustion: low explosives burn rapidly (or deflagrate), while high explosives detonate. While these definitions are distinct, the problem of precisely measuring rapid decomposition makes practical classification of explosives difficult. For a reaction to be classified as a detonation as opposed to just a deflagration, the propagation of the reaction shockwave through the material being tested must be faster than the speed of sound through that material. The speed of sound through a liquid or solid material is usually orders of magnitude faster than the speed of sound through air or other gases. \nTraditional explosives mechanics is based on the shock-sensitive rapid oxidation of carbon and hydrogen to carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide and water in the form of steam. Nitrates typically provide the required oxygen to burn the carbon and hydrogen fuel. High explosives tend to have the oxygen, carbon and hydrogen contained in one organic molecule, and less sensitive explosives like ANFO are combinations of fuel (carbon and hydrogen fuel oil) and ammonium nitrate. A sensitizer such as powdered aluminum may be added to an explosive to increase the energy of the detonation. Once detonated, the nitrogen portion of the explosive formulation emerges as nitrogen gas and toxic nitric oxides.\nDecomposition.\nThe chemical decomposition of an explosive may take years, days, hours, or a fraction of a second. The slower processes of decomposition take place in storage and are of interest only from a stability standpoint. Of more interest are the other two rapid forms besides decomposition: deflagration and detonation.\nDeflagration.\nIn deflagration, decomposition of the explosive material is propagated by a flame front which moves relatively slowly through the explosive material, at speeds less than the speed of sound within the substance (which is usually still higher than 340\u00a0m/s or in most liquid or solid materials) in contrast to detonation, which occurs at speeds greater than the speed of sound. Deflagration is a characteristic of low explosive material.\nDetonation.\nThis term is used to describe an explosive phenomenon whereby the decomposition is propagated by a shock wave traversing the explosive material at speeds greater than the speed of sound within the substance. The shock front is capable of passing through the high explosive material at supersonic typically thousands of metres per second.\nExotic.\nIn addition to chemical explosives, there are a number of more exotic explosive materials, and exotic methods of causing explosions. Examples include nuclear explosives, and abruptly heating a substance to a plasma state with a high-intensity laser or electric arc.\nLaser- and arc-heating are used in laser detonators, exploding-bridgewire detonators, and exploding foil initiators, where a shock wave and then detonation in conventional chemical explosive material is created by laser- or electric-arc heating. Laser and electric energy are not currently used in practice to generate most of the required energy, but only to initiate reactions.\nProperties.\nTo determine the suitability of an explosive substance for a particular use, its physical properties must first be known. The usefulness of an explosive can only be appreciated when the properties and the factors affecting them are fully understood. Some of the more important characteristics are listed below:\nSensitivity.\nSensitivity refers to the ease with which an explosive can be ignited or detonated, i.e., the amount and intensity of shock, friction, or heat that is required. When the term sensitivity is used, care must be taken to clarify what kind of sensitivity is under discussion. The relative sensitivity of a given explosive to impact may vary greatly from its sensitivity to friction or heat. Some of the test methods used to determine sensitivity relate to:\nSpecific explosives (usually but not always highly sensitive on one or more of the three above axes) may be idiosyncratically sensitive to such factors as pressure drop, acceleration, the presence of sharp edges or rough surfaces, incompatible materials, or in rare nuclear or electromagnetic radiation. These factors present special hazards that may rule out any practical utility.\nSensitivity is an important consideration in selecting an explosive for a particular purpose. The explosive in an armor-piercing projectile must be relatively insensitive, or the shock of impact would cause it to detonate before it penetrated to the point desired. The explosive lenses around nuclear charges are also designed to be highly insensitive, to minimize the risk of accidental detonation.\nSensitivity to initiation.\nThe index of the capacity of an explosive to be initiated into detonation in a sustained manner. It is defined by the power of the detonator which is certain to prime the explosive to a sustained and continuous detonation. Reference is made to the Sellier-Bellot scale that consists of a series of 10 detonators, from to , each of which corresponds to an increasing charge weight. In practice, most of the explosives on the market today are sensitive to an detonator, where the charge corresponds to 2\u00a0grams of mercury fulminate.\nVelocity of detonation.\nThe velocity with which the reaction process propagates in the mass of the explosive. Most commercial mining explosives have detonation velocities ranging from 1,800\u00a0m/s to 8,000\u00a0m/s. Today, velocity of detonation can be measured with accuracy. Together with density it is an important element influencing the yield of the energy transmitted for both atmospheric over-pressure and ground acceleration. By definition, a \"low explosive\", such as black powder, or smokeless gunpowder has a burn rate of 171\u2013631\u00a0m/s. In contrast, a \"high explosive\", whether a primary, such as detonating cord, or a secondary, such as TNT or C-4, has a significantly higher burn rate about 6900\u20138092\u00a0m/s.\nStability.\nStability is the ability of an explosive to be stored without deterioration.\nThe following factors affect the stability of an explosive:\nPower, performance, and strength.\nThe term power or performance as applied to an explosive refers to its ability to do work. In practice it is defined as the explosive's ability to accomplish what is intended in the way of energy delivery (i.e., fragment projection, air blast, high-velocity jet, underwater shock and bubble energy, etc.). Explosive power or performance is evaluated by a tailored series of tests to assess the material for its intended use. Of the tests listed below, cylinder expansion and air-blast tests are common to most testing programs, and the others support specific applications.\nBrisance.\nIn addition to strength, explosives display a second characteristic, which is their shattering effect or brisance (from the French meaning to \"break\"). Brisance is important in determining the effectiveness of an explosion in fragmenting shells, bomb casings, and grenades. The rapidity with which an explosive reaches its peak pressure (power) is a measure of its brisance. Brisance values are primarily employed in France and Russia.\nThe sand crush test is commonly employed to determine the relative brisance in comparison to TNT. No test is capable of directly comparing the explosive properties of two or more compounds; it is important to examine the data from several such tests (sand crush, trauzl, and so forth) in order to gauge relative brisance. True values for comparison require field experiments.\nDensity.\nDensity of loading refers to the mass of an explosive per unit volume. Several methods of loading are available, including pellet loading, cast loading, and press loading, the choice being determined by the characteristics of the explosive. Dependent upon the method employed, an average density of the loaded charge can be obtained that is within 80\u201399% of the theoretical maximum density of the explosive. High load density can reduce sensitivity by making the mass more resistant to internal friction. However, if density is increased to the extent that individual crystals are crushed, the explosive may become more sensitive. Increased load density also permits the use of more explosive, thereby increasing the power of the warhead. It is possible to compress an explosive beyond a point of sensitivity, known also as \"dead-pressing\", in which the material is no longer capable of being reliably initiated, if at all.\nVolatility.\nVolatility is the readiness with which a substance vaporizes. Excessive volatility often results in the development of pressure within rounds of ammunition and separation of mixtures into their constituents. Volatility affects the chemical composition of the explosive such that a marked reduction in stability may occur, which results in an increase in the danger of handling.\nHygroscopicity and water resistance.\nThe introduction of water into an explosive is highly undesirable since it reduces the sensitivity, strength, and velocity of detonation of the explosive. Hygroscopicity is a measure of a material's moisture-absorbing tendencies. Moisture affects explosives adversely by acting as an inert material that absorbs heat when vaporized, and by acting as a solvent medium that can cause undesired chemical reactions. Sensitivity, strength, and velocity of detonation are reduced by inert materials that reduce the continuity of the explosive mass. When the moisture content evaporates during detonation, cooling occurs, which reduces the temperature of reaction. Stability is also affected by the presence of moisture since moisture promotes decomposition of the explosive and, in addition, causes corrosion of the explosive's metal container.\nExplosives considerably differ from one another as to their behavior in the presence of water. Gelatin dynamites containing nitroglycerine have a degree of water resistance. Explosives based on ammonium nitrate have little or no water resistance as ammonium nitrate is highly soluble in water and is hygroscopic.\nToxicity.\nMany explosives are toxic to some extent. Manufacturing inputs can also be organic compounds or hazardous materials that require special handling due to risks (such as carcinogens). The decomposition products, residual solids, or gases of some explosives can be toxic, whereas others are harmless, such as carbon dioxide and water.\nExamples of harmful by-products are:\n\"Green explosives\" seek to reduce environment and health impacts. An example of such is the lead-free primary explosive copper(I) 5-nitrotetrazolate, an alternative to lead azide.\nExplosive train.\nExplosive material may be incorporated in the explosive train of a device or system. An example is a pyrotechnic lead igniting a booster, which causes the main charge to detonate.\nVolume of products of explosion.\nThe most widely used explosives are condensed liquids or solids converted to gaseous products by explosive chemical reactions and the energy released by those reactions. The gaseous products of complete reaction are typically carbon dioxide, steam, and nitrogen. Gaseous volumes computed by the ideal gas law tend to be too large at high pressures characteristic of explosions. Ultimate volume expansion may be estimated at three orders of magnitude, or one liter per gram of explosive. Explosives with an oxygen deficit will generate soot or gases like carbon monoxide and hydrogen, which may react with surrounding materials such as atmospheric oxygen. Attempts to obtain more precise volume estimates must consider the possibility of such side reactions, condensation of steam, and aqueous solubility of gases like carbon dioxide.\nOxygen balance (OB% or \"\u03a9\").\nOxygen balance is an expression that is used to indicate the degree to which an explosive can be oxidized. If an explosive molecule contains just enough oxygen to convert all of its carbon to carbon dioxide, all of its hydrogen to water, and all of its metal to metal oxide with no excess, the molecule is said to have a zero oxygen balance. The molecule is said to have a positive oxygen balance if it contains more oxygen than is needed and a negative oxygen balance if it contains less oxygen than is needed. The sensitivity, strength, and brisance of an explosive are all somewhat dependent upon oxygen balance and tend to approach their maxima as oxygen balance approaches zero.\nChemical composition.\nA chemical explosive may consist of either a chemically pure compound, such as nitroglycerin, or a mixture of a fuel and an oxidizer, such as black powder or grain dust and air.\nPure compounds.\nSome chemical compounds are unstable in that, when shocked, they react, possibly to the point of detonation. Each molecule of the compound dissociates into two or more new molecules (generally gases) with the release of energy.\nThe above compositions may describe most of the explosive material, but a practical explosive will often include small percentages of other substances. For example, dynamite is a mixture of highly sensitive nitroglycerin with sawdust, powdered silica, or most commonly diatomaceous earth, which act as stabilizers. Plastics and polymers may be added to bind powders of explosive compounds; waxes may be incorporated to make them safer to handle; aluminium powder may be introduced to increase total energy and blast effects. Explosive compounds are also often \"alloyed\": HMX or RDX powders may be mixed (typically by melt-casting) with TNT to form Octol or Cyclotol.\nOxidized fuel.\nAn oxidizer is a pure substance (molecule) that in a chemical reaction can contribute some atoms of one or more oxidizing elements, in which the fuel component of the explosive burns. On the simplest level, the oxidizer may itself be an oxidizing element, such as gaseous or liquid oxygen.\nAvailability and cost.\nThe availability and cost of explosives are determined by the availability of the raw materials and the cost, complexity, and safety of the manufacturing operations.\nClassification.\nBy sensitivity.\nPrimary.\nA primary explosive is an explosive that is extremely sensitive to stimuli such as impact, friction, heat, static electricity, or electromagnetic radiation. Some primary explosives are also known as contact explosives. A relatively small amount of energy is required for initiation. As a very general rule, primary explosives are considered to be those compounds that are more sensitive than PETN. As a practical measure, primary explosives are sufficiently sensitive that they can be reliably initiated with a blow from a hammer; however, PETN can also usually be initiated in this manner, so this is only a very broad guideline. Additionally, several compounds, such as nitrogen triiodide, are so sensitive that they cannot even be handled without detonating. Nitrogen triiodide is so sensitive that it can be reliably detonated by exposure to alpha radiation. \nPrimary explosives are often used in detonators or to trigger larger charges of less sensitive secondary explosives. Primary explosives are commonly used in blasting caps and percussion caps to translate a physical shock signal. In other situations, different signals such as electrical or physical shock, or, in the case of laser detonation systems, light, are used to initiate an action, i.e., an explosion. A small quantity, usually milligrams, is sufficient to initiate a larger charge of explosive that is usually safer to handle.\nExamples of primary high explosives are:\nSecondary.\nA secondary explosive is less sensitive than a primary explosive and requires substantially more energy to be initiated. Because they are less sensitive, they are usable in a wider variety of applications and are safer to handle and store. Secondary explosives are used in larger quantities in an explosive train and are usually initiated by a smaller quantity of a primary explosive.\nExamples of secondary explosives include TNT and RDX.\nTertiary.\nTertiary explosives, also called blasting agents, are so insensitive to shock that they cannot be reliably detonated by practical quantities of primary explosive, and instead require an intermediate explosive booster of secondary explosive. These are often used for safety and the typically lower costs of material and handling. The largest consumers are large-scale mining and construction operations.\nMost tertiaries include a fuel and an oxidizer. ANFO can be a tertiary explosive if its reaction rate is slow.\nBy velocity.\nLow.\nLow explosives (or low-order explosives) are compounds wherein the rate of decomposition proceeds through the material at less than the speed of sound. The decomposition is propagated by a flame front (deflagration) which travels much more slowly through the explosive material than a shock wave of a high explosive. Under normal conditions, low explosives undergo deflagration at rates that vary from a few centimetres per second to approximately . It is possible for them to deflagrate very quickly, producing an effect similar to a detonation. This can happen under higher pressure (such as when gunpowder deflagrates inside the confined space of a bullet casing, accelerating the bullet to well beyond the speed of sound) or temperature.\nA low explosive is usually a mixture of a combustible substance and an oxidant that decomposes rapidly (deflagration); however, they burn more slowly than a high explosive, which has an extremely fast burn rate.\nLow explosives are normally employed as propellants. Included in this group are petroleum products such as propane and gasoline, gunpowder (including smokeless powder), and light pyrotechnics, such as flares and fireworks, but can replace high explosives in certain applications, including in gas pressure blasting.\nHigh.\nHigh explosives (HE, or high-order explosives) are explosive materials that detonate, meaning that the explosive shock front passes through the material at a supersonic speed. High explosives detonate with explosive velocity of about . For instance, TNT has a detonation (burn) rate of approximately 6.9\u00a0km/s (22,600 feet per second), detonating cord of 6.7\u00a0km/s (22,000 feet per second), and C-4 about 8.0\u00a0km/s (26,000 feet per second). They are normally employed in mining, demolition, and military applications. The term \"high explosive\" is in contrast with the term \"low explosive\", which explodes (deflagrates) at a lower rate.\nHigh explosives can be divided into two explosives classes differentiated by sensitivity: primary explosive and secondary explosive. Although tertiary explosives (such as ANFO at 3,200\u00a0m/s) can technically meet the explosive velocity definition, they are not considered high explosives in regulatory contexts.\nCountless high-explosive compounds are chemically possible, but commercially and militarily important ones have included NG, TNT, TNP, TNX, RDX, HMX, PETN, TATP, TATB, and HNS.\nBy physical form.\nExplosives are often characterized by the physical form that the explosives are produced or used in. These use forms are commonly categorized as:\nShipping label classifications.\nShipping labels and tags may include both United Nations and national markings.\nUnited Nations markings include numbered Hazard Class and Division (HC/D) codes and alphabetic Compatibility Group codes. Though the two are related, they are separate and distinct. Any Compatibility Group designator can be assigned to any Hazard Class and Division. An example of this hybrid marking would be a consumer firework, which is labeled as 1.4G or 1.4S.\nExamples of national markings would include United States Department of Transportation (U.S. DOT) codes.\nUnited Nations (UN) GHS Hazard Class and Division.\nThe UN GHS Hazard Class and Division (HC/D) is a numeric designator within a hazard class indicating the character, predominance of associated hazards, and potential for causing personnel casualties and property damage. It is an internationally accepted system that communicates using the minimum amount of markings the primary hazard associated with a substance.\nListed below are the Divisions for Class 1 (Explosives):\nTo see an entire UNO Table, browse Paragraphs 3\u20138 and 3\u20139 of NAVSEA OP 5, Vol. 1, Chapter 3.\nClass 1 Compatibility Group.\nCompatibility Group codes are used to indicate storage compatibility for HC/D Class 1 (explosive) materials. Letters are used to designate 13 compatibility groups as follows.\nRegulation.\nThe legality of possessing or using explosives varies by jurisdiction. Various countries around the world have enacted explosives law and require licenses to manufacture, distribute, store, use, possess explosives or ingredients.\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, the civil and commercial use of explosives is covered under the \"Wet explosieven voor civiel gebruik\" (explosives for civil use Act), in accordance with EU directive nr. 93/15/EEG (Dutch). The illegal use of explosives is covered under the \"Wet Wapens en Munitie\" (Weapons and Munition Act) (Dutch).\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe new Explosives Regulations 2014 (ER 2014) came into force on 1 October 2014 and defines \"explosive\" as:\nUnited States.\nDuring World War I, numerous laws were created to regulate war related industries and increase security within the United States. In 1917, the 65th United States Congress created many laws, including the \"Espionage Act of 1917\" and \"Explosives Act of 1917\".\nThe \"Explosives Act of 1917\" (session 1, chapter 83, ) was signed on 6 October 1917 and went into effect on 16 November 1917. The legal summary is \"An Act to prohibit the manufacture, distribution, storage, use, and possession in time of war of explosives, providing regulations for the safe manufacture, distribution, storage, use, and possession of the same, and for other purposes\". This was the first federal regulation of licensing explosives purchases. The act was deactivated after World War I ended.\nAfter the United States entered World War II, the Explosives Act of 1917 was reactivated. In 1947, the act was deactivated by President Truman.\nThe \"Organized Crime Control Act of 1970\" () transferred many explosives regulations to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) of the Department of Treasury. The bill became effective in 1971.\nCurrently, regulations are governed by Title 18 of the United States Code and Title 27 of the Code of Federal Regulations:\nExternal links.\nListed in alphabetical order:"}
