{"id": "6558", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6558", "title": "Cello", "text": "The violoncello ( , ), normally simply abbreviated as cello ( ), is a middle pitched bowed (sometimes plucked and occasionally hit) string instrument of the violin family. Its four strings are usually tuned in perfect fifths: from low to high, C2, G2, D3 and A3. The viola's four strings are each an octave higher. Music for the cello is generally written in the bass clef, with usually, tenor clef and treble clef used for higher-range passages.\nPlayed by a \"cellist\" or \"violoncellist\", it enjoys a large solo repertoire with and without accompaniment, as well as numerous concerti. As a solo instrument, the cello uses its whole range, from baritone to soprano, and in chamber music, such as string quartets and the orchestra's string section, it often plays the bass part, where it may be reinforced an octave lower by the double basses. Figured bass music of the Baroque era typically assumes a cello, viola da gamba or bassoon as part of the basso continuo group alongside chordal instruments such as organ, harpsichord, lute, or theorbo. Cellos are found in many other ensembles, from modern Chinese orchestras to cello rock bands.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"cello\" is derived from the ending of the Italian \"violoncello\", which means \"little violone\". Violone (\"big viola\") was a large-sized member of viol (viola da gamba) family or the violin (viola da braccio) family. The term \"violone\" today usually refers to the lowest-pitched instrument of the viols, a family of stringed instruments that went out of fashion around the end of the 17th century in most countries except England and, especially, France, where they survived another half-century before the louder violin family came into greater favour in that country as well. \nIn modern symphony orchestras, it is the second largest stringed instrument (the double bass is the largest). Thus, the name \"violoncello\" contained both the augmentative \"-one\" (\"big\") and the diminutive \"-cello\" (\"little\"). By the turn of the 20th century, it had become common to shorten the name to 'cello, with the apostrophe indicating the missing stem. It is now customary to use \"cello\" without apostrophe as the full designation. \"Viol\" is derived from the root \"viola\", which was derived from Medieval Latin , meaning stringed instrument. \nGeneral description.\nTuning.\nCellos are tuned in fifths, starting with C2 (two octaves below middle C), followed by G2, D3, and then A3. It is tuned in the exact same intervals and strings as the viola, but an octave lower. Similar to the double bass, the cello has an endpin that rests on the floor to support the instrument's weight. The cello is most closely associated with European classical music. The instrument is a part of the standard orchestra, as part of the string section, and is the bass voice of the string quartet (although many composers give it a melodic role as well), as well as being part of many other chamber groups.\nWorks.\nAmong the most well-known Baroque works for the cello are Johann Sebastian Bach's six unaccompanied Suites. Other significant works include Sonatas and Concertos by Antonio Vivaldi, and solo sonatas by Francesco Geminiani and Giovanni Bononcini. Domenico Gabrielli was one of the first composers to treat the cello as a solo instrument. As a basso continuo instrument the cello may have been used in works by Francesca Caccini (1587\u20131641), Barbara Strozzi (1619\u20131677) with pieces such as \"Il primo libro di madrigali, per 2\u20135 voci e basso continuo, op. 1\" and Elisabeth Jacquet de La Guerre (1665\u20131729), who wrote six sonatas for violin and basso continuo. Francesco Supriani's \"Principij da imparare a suonare il violoncello e con 12 Toccate a solo\" (before 1753), dates from this era. As the title of the work suggests, it contains 12 toccatas for solo cello, which along with Johann Sebastian Bach's Cello Suites, are some of the first works of that type.\nFrom the Classical era, the two concertos by Joseph Haydn in C major and D major stand out, as do the five sonatas for cello and pianoforte of Ludwig van Beethoven, which span the important three periods of his compositional evolution. Other outstanding examples include the three Concerti by Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, Capricci by dall'Abaco, and Sonatas by Flackton, Boismortier, and Luigi Boccherini. A \"Divertimento for Piano, Clarinet, Viola and Cello\" is among the surviving works by Duchess Anna Amalia of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel (1739\u20131807). Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart supposedly wrote a Cello Concerto in F major, K. 206a in 1775, but this has since been lost. His Sinfonia Concertante in A major, K. 320e includes a solo part for cello, along with the violin and viola, although this work is incomplete and only exists in fragments, therefore it is given an Anhang number (Anh. 104).\nWell-known works of the Romantic era include the Robert Schumann Concerto, the Anton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k Concerto, the first Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns Concerto, as well as the two sonatas and the Double Concerto by Johannes Brahms. A review of compositions for cello in the Romantic era must include the German composer Fanny Mendelssohn (1805\u20131847), who wrote Fantasia in G Minor for cello and piano and a Capriccio in A-flat for cello.\nCompositions from the late 19th and early 20th century include three cello sonatas (including the Cello Sonata in C Minor written in 1880) by Dame Ethel Smyth (1858\u20131944), Edward Elgar's Cello Concerto in E minor, Claude Debussy's Sonata for Cello and Piano, and unaccompanied cello sonatas by Zolt\u00e1n Kod\u00e1ly and Paul Hindemith. Pieces including cello were written by American Music Center founder Marion Bauer (1882\u20131955) (two trio sonatas for flute, cello, and piano) and Ruth Crawford Seeger (1901\u20131953) (Diaphonic suite No. 2 for bassoon and cello).\nThe cello's versatility made it popular with many composers in this era, such as Sergei Prokofiev, Dmitri Shostakovich, Benjamin Britten, Gy\u00f6rgy Ligeti, Witold Lutoslawski and Henri Dutilleux. Polish composer Gra\u017cyna Bacewicz (1909\u20131969) was writing for cello in the mid 20th century with Concerto No. 1 for Cello and Orchestra (1951), Concerto No. 2 for Cello and Orchestra (1963) and in 1964 composed her Quartet for four cellos.\nIn the 2010s, the instrument is found in popular music, but was more commonly used in 1970s pop and disco music. Today it is sometimes featured in pop and rock recordings, examples of which are noted later in this article. The cello has also appeared in major hip-hop and R &amp; B performances, such as singers Rihanna and Ne-Yo's 2007 performance at the American Music Awards. The instrument has also been modified for Indian classical music by Nancy Lesh and Saskia Rao-de Haas.[5]\nHistory.\nThe violin family, including cello-sized instruments, emerged as a family of instruments distinct from the viola da gamba family. The earliest depictions of the violin family, from Italy , show three sizes of instruments, roughly corresponding to what we now call violins, violas, and cellos. Contrary to a popular misconception, the cello did not evolve from the viola da gamba, but existed alongside it for about two and a half centuries. The violin family is also known as the viola da braccio (meaning viola for the arm) family, a reference to the primary way the members of the family are held. This is to distinguish it from the viola da gamba (meaning viola for the leg) family, in which all the members are all held with the legs. The likely predecessors of the violin family include the lira da braccio and the rebec. The earliest surviving cellos are made by Andrea Amati, the first known member of the celebrated Amati family of luthiers.\nThe direct ancestor to the violoncello was the bass violin.[\"unt. library\"] Monteverdi referred to the instrument as \"basso de viola da braccio\" in \"Orfeo\" (1607). Although the first bass violin, possibly invented as early as 1538, was most likely inspired by the viol, it was created to be used in consort with the violin. The bass violin was actually often referred to as a \"violone\", or \"large viola\", as were the viols of the same period. Instruments that share features with both the bass violin and the \"viola da gamba\" appear in Italian art of the early 16th century.\nThe invention of wire-wound strings (fine wire around a thin gut core), in Bologna, allowed for a finer bass sound than was possible with purely gut strings on such a short body. This instrument had disadvantages as well, however. The cello's light sound was not as suitable for church and ensemble playing, so it had to be doubled by organ, theorbo, or violone.\nAround 1700, Italian players popularized the cello in northern Europe, although the bass violin (basse de violon) continued to be used for another two decades in France. Many existing bass violins were literally cut down in size to convert them into cellos according to the smaller pattern developed by Stradivarius, who also made a number of old pattern large cellos (the 'Servais'). The sizes, names, and tunings of the cello varied widely by geography and time. The size was not standardized until .\nDespite similarities to the viola da gamba, the cello is actually part of the viola da braccio family, meaning \"viol of the arm\", which includes, among others, the violin and viola. Though paintings like Bruegel's \"The Rustic Wedding\", and Jambe de Fer in his \"Epitome Musical\" suggest that the bass violin had alternate playing positions, these were short-lived and the more practical and ergonomic \"a gamba\" position eventually replaced them entirely.\nBaroque-era cellos differed from the modern instrument in several ways. The neck has a different form and angle, which matches the baroque bass-bar and stringing. The fingerboard is usually shorter than that of the modern cello, as the highest notes are not often called for in baroque music. Modern cellos have an endpin at the bottom to support the instrument (and transmit some of the sound through the floor), while Baroque cellos are held only by the calves of the player. Modern bows curve in and are held at the frog; Baroque bows curve out and are held closer to the bow's point of balance. Modern strings are normally flatwound with a metal (or synthetic) core; Baroque strings are made of gut, with the G and C strings wire-wound. Modern cellos often have fine tuners connecting the strings to the tailpiece, which makes it much easier to tune the instrument, but such pins are rendered ineffective by the flexibility of the gut strings used on Baroque cellos. Overall, the modern instrument has much higher string tension than the Baroque cello, resulting in a louder, more projecting tone, with fewer overtones. In addition, the instrument was less standardized in size and number of strings; a smaller, five-string variant (the violoncello piccolo) was commonly used as a solo instrument and five-string instruments are occasionally specified in the Baroque repertoire. BWV 1012 (Bach's 6th Cello Suite) was written for 5 string Cello but since its additional High E String is an Octave below the same string on the Violin, anything written for the Violin can be played on the 5 string Cello, sounding an Octave lower than written.\nFew educational works specifically devoted to the cello existed before the 18th century and those that do exist contain little value to the performer beyond simple accounts of instrumental technique. One of the earliest cello manuals is Michel Corrette's \"M\u00e9thode, th\u00e8orique et pratique pour apprendre en peu de temps le violoncelle dans sa perfection\" (Paris, 1741).\nModern use.\nOrchestral.\nCellos are part of the standard symphony orchestra, which usually includes eight to twelve cellists. The cello section, in standard orchestral seating, is located on stage left (the audience's right) in the front, opposite the first violin section. However, some orchestras and conductors prefer switching the positioning of the viola and cello sections. The \"principal\" cellist is the section leader, determining bowings for the section in conjunction with other string principals, playing solos, and leading entrances (when the section begins to play its part). Principal players always sit closest to the audience.\nThe cellos are a critical part of orchestral music; all symphonic works involve the cello section, and many pieces require cello soli or solos. Much of the time, cellos provide part of the low-register harmony for the orchestra. Often, the cello section plays the melody for a brief period, before returning to the harmony role. There are also cello concertos, which are orchestral pieces that feature a solo cellist accompanied by an entire orchestra.\nSolo.\nThere are numerous cello concertos \u2013 where a solo cello is accompanied by an orchestra \u2013 notably 25 by Vivaldi, 12 by Boccherini, at least three by Haydn, three by C.\u00a0P.\u00a0E. Bach, two by Saint-Sa\u00ebns, two by Dvo\u0159\u00e1k, and one each by Robert Schumann, Lalo, and Elgar. There were also some composers who, while not otherwise cellists, did write cello-specific repertoire, such as Nikolaus Kraft, who wrote six cello concertos. Beethoven's Triple Concerto for Cello, Violin and Piano and Brahms' Double Concerto for Cello and Violin are also part of the concertante repertoire, although in both cases the cello shares solo duties with at least one other instrument. Moreover, several composers wrote large-scale pieces for cello and orchestra, which are concertos in all but name. Some familiar \"concertos\" are Richard Strauss' tone poem \"Don Quixote\", Tchaikovsky's \"Variations on a Rococo Theme\", Bloch's \"Schelomo\" and Bruch's \"Kol Nidrei\".\nIn the 20th century, the cello repertoire grew immensely. This was partly due to the influence of virtuoso cellist Mstislav Rostropovich, who inspired, commissioned, and premiered dozens of new works. Among these, Prokofiev's \"Symphony-Concerto\", Britten's \"Cello Symphony\", the concertos of Shostakovich and Lutos\u0142awski as well as Dutilleux's \"Tout un monde lointain...\" have already become part of the standard repertoire. Other major composers who wrote concertante works for him include Messiaen, Jolivet, Berio, and Penderecki. In addition, Arnold, Barber, Glass, Hindemith, Honegger, Ligeti, Myaskovsky, Penderecki, Rodrigo, Villa-Lobos and Walton wrote major concertos for other cellists, notably for Gaspar Cassad\u00f3, Aldo Parisot, Gregor Piatigorsky, Siegfried Palm and Julian Lloyd Webber.\nThere are also many sonatas for cello and piano. Those written by Beethoven, Mendelssohn, Chopin, Brahms, Grieg, Rachmaninoff, Debussy, Faur\u00e9, Shostakovich, Prokofiev, Poulenc, Carter, and Britten are particularly well known.\nOther important pieces for cello and piano include Schumann's five \"St\u00fccke im Volkston\" and transcriptions like Schubert's \"Arpeggione Sonata\" (originally for arpeggione and piano), C\u00e9sar Franck's Cello Sonata (originally a violin sonata, transcribed by Jules Delsart with the composer's approval), Stravinsky's \"Suite italienne\" (transcribed by the composer \u2013 with Gregor Piatigorsky \u2013 from his ballet \"Pulcinella\") and Bart\u00f3k's first rhapsody (also transcribed by the composer, originally for violin and piano).\nThere are pieces for cello solo, Johann Sebastian Bach's six Suites for Cello (which are among the best-known solo cello pieces), Kod\u00e1ly's Sonata for Solo Cello and Britten's three Cello Suites. Other notable examples include Hindemith's and Ysa\u00ffe's Sonatas for Solo Cello, Dutilleux's \"Trois Strophes sur le Nom de Sacher\", Berio's \"Les Mots Sont All\u00e9s\", Cassad\u00f3's Suite for Solo Cello, Ligeti's Solo Sonata, Carter's two \"Figment\"s and Xenakis' \"Nomos Alpha\" and \"Kottos\".\nThere are also modern solo pieces written for cello, such as Julie-O by Mark Summer.\nQuartets and other ensembles.\nThe cello is a member of the traditional string quartet as well as string quintets, sextet or trios and other mixed ensembles.\nThere are also pieces written for two, three, four, or more cellos; this type of ensemble is also called a \"cello choir\" and its sound is familiar from the introduction to Rossini's William Tell Overture as well as Zaccharia's prayer scene in Verdi's Nabucco. Tchaikovsky's 1812 Overture also starts with a cello ensemble, with four cellos playing the top lines and two violas playing the bass lines. As a self-sufficient ensemble, its most famous repertoire is Heitor Villa-Lobos' first of his Bachianas Brasileiras for cello ensemble (the fifth is for soprano and 8 cellos). Other examples are Offenbach's cello duets, quartet, and sextet, P\u00e4rt's Fratres for eight cellos and Boulez' \"Messagesquisse\" for seven cellos, or even Villa-Lobos' rarely played \"Fantasia Concertante\" (1958) for 32 cellos. The 12 cellists of the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra (or \"the Twelve\" as they have since taken to being called) specialize in this repertoire and have commissioned many works, including arrangements of well-known popular songs.\nPopular music, jazz, world music and neoclassical.\nThe cello is less common in popular music than in classical music. Several bands feature a cello in their standard line-up, including Hoppy Jones of the Ink Spots and Joe Kwon of the Avett Brothers. The more common use in pop and rock is to bring the instrument in for a particular song. In the 1960s, artists such as the Beatles and Cher used the cello in popular music, in songs such as The Beatles' \"Yesterday\", \"Eleanor Rigby\" and \"Strawberry Fields Forever\", and Cher's \"Bang Bang (My Baby Shot Me Down)\". \"Good Vibrations\" by the Beach Boys includes the cello in its instrumental ensemble, which includes a number of instruments unusual for this sort of music. Bass guitarist Jack Bruce, who had originally studied music on a performance scholarship for cello, played a prominent cello part in \"As You Said\" on Cream's \"Wheels of Fire\" studio album (1968).\nIn the 1970s, the Electric Light Orchestra enjoyed great commercial success taking inspiration from so-called \"Beatlesque\" arrangements, adding the cello (and violin) to the standard rock combo line-up and in 1978 the UK-based rock band Colosseum II collaborated with cellist Julian Lloyd Webber on the recording \"Variations\". Most notably, Pink Floyd included a cello solo in their 1970 epic instrumental \"Atom Heart Mother\". Bass guitarist Mike Rutherford of Genesis was originally a cellist and included some cello parts in their \"Foxtrot\" album.\nEstablished non-traditional cello groups include Apocalyptica, a group of Finnish cellists best known for their versions of Metallica songs; Rasputina, a group of cellists committed to an intricate cello style intermingled with Gothic music; the Massive Violins, an ensemble of seven singing cellists known for their arrangements of rock, pop and classical hits; Von Cello, a cello-fronted rock power trio; Break of Reality, who mix elements of classical music with the more modern rock and metal genre; Cello Fury, a cello rock band that performs original rock/classical crossover music; and Jelloslave, a Minneapolis-based cello duo with two percussionists. These groups are examples of a style that has become known as cello rock. The crossover string quartet Bond also includes a cellist. Silenzium and Cellissimo Quartet are Russian (Novosibirsk) groups playing rock and metal and having more and more popularity in Siberia. Cold Fairyland from Shanghai, China is using a cello along with a pipa as the main solo instrument to create East meets West progressive (folk) rock.\nMore recent bands who have used the cello include Clean Bandit, Aerosmith, The Auteurs, Nirvana, Oasis, Ra Ra Riot, Smashing Pumpkins, James, Talk Talk, Phillip Phillips, OneRepublic, Electric Light Orchestra and the baroque rock band Arcade Fire. An Atlanta-based trio, King Richard's Sunday Best, also uses a cellist in their lineup. So-called \"chamber pop\" artists like Kronos Quartet, The Vitamin String Quartet and Margot and the Nuclear So and So's have also recently made cello common in modern alternative rock. Heavy metal band System of a Down has also made use of the cello's rich sound. The indie rock band The Stiletto Formal are known for using a cello as a major staple of their sound; similarly, the indie rock band Canada employs two cello players in their lineup. The orch-rock group The Polyphonic Spree, which has pioneered the use of stringed and symphonic instruments, employs the cello in creative ways for many of their \"psychedelic-esque\" melodies. The first-wave screamo band I Would Set Myself On Fire For You featured a cello as well as a viola to create a more folk-oriented sound. The band Panic! at the Disco uses a cello in their song \"Build God, Then We'll Talk\", with lead vocalist Brendon Urie recording the cello solo himself. The Lumineers added cellist Nela Pekarek to the band in 2010. Radiohead makes frequent use of cello in their music, notably for the songs \"Burn The Witch\" and \"Glass Eyes\" in 2016.\nIn jazz, bassists Oscar Pettiford and Harry Babasin were among the first to use the cello as a solo instrument; both tuned their instruments in fourths, an octave above the double bass. Fred Katz (who was not a bassist) was one of the first notable jazz cellists to use the instrument's standard tuning and arco technique. Contemporary jazz cellists include Abdul Wadud, Diedre Murray, Ron Carter, Dave Holland, David Darling, Lucio Amanti, Akua Dixon, Ernst Reijseger, Fred Lonberg-Holm, Tom Cora and Erik Friedlander. Modern musical theatre pieces like Jason Robert Brown's \"The Last Five Years\", Duncan Sheik's \"Spring Awakening\", Adam Guettel's \"Floyd Collins\", and Ricky Ian Gordon's \"My Life with Albertine\" use small string ensembles (including solo cellos) to a prominent extent.\nIn Indian classical music, Saskia Rao-de Haas is a well-established soloist as well as playing duets with her sitarist husband, Pt. Shubhendra Rao. Other cellists performing Indian classical music are Nancy Lesh (Dhrupad) and Anup Biswas. Both Rao and Lesh play the cello sitting cross-legged on the floor.\nThe cello can also be used in bluegrass and folk music, with notable players including Ben Sollee of the Sparrow Quartet and the \"Cajun cellist\" Sean Grissom, as well as Vyvienne Long, who, in addition to her own projects, has played for those of Damien Rice. Cellists such as Natalie Haas, Abby Newton, and Liz Davis Maxfield have contributed significantly to the use of cello playing in Celtic folk music, often with the cello featured as a primary melodic instrument and employing the skills and techniques of traditional fiddle playing. Lindsay Mac is becoming well known for playing the cello like a guitar, with her cover of The Beatles' \"Blackbird\".\nConstruction.\nThe cello is typically made from carved wood, although other materials such as carbon fiber or aluminum may be used. A traditional cello has a spruce top, with maple for the back, sides, and neck. Other woods, such as poplar or willow, are sometimes used for the back and sides. Less expensive cellos frequently have tops and backs made of laminated wood. Laminated cellos are widely used in elementary and secondary school orchestras and youth orchestras, because they are much more durable than carved wood cellos (i.e., they are less likely to crack if bumped or dropped) and they are much less expensive.\nThe top and back are traditionally hand-carved, though less expensive cellos are often machine-produced. The sides, or ribs, are made by heating the wood and bending it around forms. The cello body has a wide top bout, narrow middle formed by two C-bouts, and wide bottom bout, with the bridge and F holes just below the middle. The top and back of the cello have a decorative border inlay known as purfling. While purfling is attractive, it is also functional: if the instrument is struck, the purfling can prevent cracking of the wood. A crack may form at the rim of the instrument but spreads no further. Without purfling, cracks can spread up or down the top or back. Playing, traveling and the weather all affect the cello and can increase a crack if purfling is not in place.\nThe fingerboard and pegs on a cello are generally made from ebony, as it is strong and does not wear out easily.\nAlternative materials.\nIn the late 1920s and early 1930s, the Aluminum Company of America (Alcoa) as well as German luthier G.A. Pfretzschner produced an unknown number of aluminum cellos (in addition to aluminum double basses and violins). Cello manufacturer Luis &amp; Clark constructs cellos from carbon fibre. Carbon fibre instruments are particularly suitable for outdoor playing because of the strength of the material and its resistance to humidity and temperature fluctuations. Luis &amp; Clark has produced over 1000 cellos, some of which are owned by cellists such as Yo-Yo Ma and Josephine van Lier.\nNeck, fingerboard, pegbox, and scroll.\nAbove the main body is the carved neck. The neck has a curved cross-section on its underside, which is where the player's thumb runs along the neck during playing. The neck leads to a pegbox and the scroll, which are all normally carved out of a single piece of wood, usually maple. The fingerboard is glued to the neck and extends over the body of the instrument. The fingerboard is given a curved shape, matching the curve on the bridge. Both the fingerboard and bridge need to be curved so that the performer can bow individual strings. If the cello were to have a flat fingerboard and bridge, as with a typical guitar, the performer would only be able to bow the leftmost and rightmost two strings or bow all the strings. The performer would not be able to play the inner two strings alone.\nThe nut is a raised piece of wood, fitted where the fingerboard meets the pegbox, in which the strings rest in shallow slots or grooves to keep them the correct distance apart. The pegbox houses four tapered tuning pegs, one for each string. The pegs are used to tune the cello by either tightening or loosening the string. The pegs are called \"friction pegs\", because they maintain their position by friction. The scroll is a traditional ornamental part of the cello and a feature of all other members of the violin family. Ebony is usually used for the tuning pegs, fingerboard, and nut, but other hardwoods, such as boxwood or rosewood, can be used. Black fittings on low-cost instruments are often made from inexpensive wood that has been blackened or \"ebonized\" to look like ebony, which is much harder and more expensive. Ebonized parts such as tuning pegs may crack or split, and the black surface of the fingerboard will eventually wear down to reveal the lighter wood underneath.\nStrings.\nHistorically, cello strings had cores made out of catgut, which, despite its name, is made from sheep or goat intestines. Most modern strings used in the 2010s are wound with metallic materials like aluminum, titanium and chromium. Cellists may mix different types of strings on their instruments. The pitches of the open strings are C, G, D, and A (black note heads in the playing range figure above), unless alternative tuning (scordatura) is specified by the composer. Some composers (e.g. Ottorino Respighi in the final movement of \"The Pines of Rome\") ask that the low C be tuned down to a B-flat so that the performer can play a different low note on the lowest open string.\nTailpiece and endpin.\nThe tailpiece and endpin are found in the lower part of the cello. The tailpiece is the part of the cello to which the \"ball ends\" of the strings are attached by passing them through holes. The tailpiece is attached to the bottom of the cello. The tailpiece is traditionally made of ebony or another hardwood, but can also be made of plastic or steel on lower-cost instruments. It attaches the strings to the lower end of the cello and can have one or more fine tuners. The fine tuners are used to make smaller adjustments to the pitch of the string. The fine tuners can increase the tension of each string (raising the pitch) or decrease the tension of the string (lowering the pitch). When the performer is putting on a new string, the fine tuner for that string is normally reset to a middle position, and then the peg is turned to bring the string up to pitch. The fine turners are used for subtle, minor adjustments to pitch, such as tuning a cello to the oboe's 440\u00a0Hz A note or tuning the cello to a piano.\nThe endpin or spike is made of wood, metal, or rigid carbon fiber and supports the cello in playing position. The endpin can be retracted into the hollow body of the instrument when the cello is being transported in its case. This makes the cello easier to move about. When the performer wishes to play the cello, the endpin is pulled out to lengthen it. The endpin is locked into the player's preferred length with a screw mechanism. The adjustable nature of endpins enables performers of different ages and body sizes to adjust the endpin length to suit them. In the Baroque period, the cello was held between the calves, as there was no endpin at that time. The endpin was \"introduced by Adrien Servais 1845 to give the instrument greater stability\". Modern endpins are retractable and adjustable; older ones were removed when not in use. (The word \"endpin\" sometimes also refers to the button of wood located at this place in all instruments in the violin family, but this is usually called \"tailpin\".) The sharp tip of the cello's endpin is sometimes capped with a rubber tip that protects the tip from dulling and prevents the cello from slipping on the floor. Many cellists use a rubber pad with a metal cup to keep the tip from slipping on the floor. A number of accessories exist to keep the endpin from slipping; these include ropes that attach to the chair leg and other devices.\nBridge and f-holes.\nThe bridge holds the strings above the cello and transfers their vibrations to the top of the instrument and the soundpost inside (see below). The bridge is not glued but rather held in place by the tension of the strings. The bridge is usually positioned by the cross point of the \"f-hole\" (i.e., where the horizontal line occurs in the \"f\"). The f-holes, named for their shape, are located on either side of the bridge and allow air to move in and out of the instrument as part of the sound-production process. The f-holes also act as access points to the interior of the cello for repairs or maintenance. Sometimes a small length of rubber hose containing a water-soaked sponge, called a Dampit, is inserted through the f-holes and serves as a humidifier. This keeps the wood components of the cello from drying out.\nInternal features.\nInternally, the cello has two important features: a bass bar, which is glued to the underside of the top of the instrument, and a round wooden sound post, a solid wooden cylinder which is wedged between the top and bottom plates. The bass bar, found under the bass foot of the bridge, serves to support the cello's top and distribute the vibrations from the strings to the body of the instrument. The soundpost, found under the treble side of the bridge, connects the back and front of the cello. Like the bridge, the soundpost is not glued but is kept in place by the tensions of the bridge and strings. Together, the bass bar and sound post transfer the strings' vibrations to the top (front) of the instrument (and to a lesser extent the back), acting as a diaphragm to produce the instrument's sound.\nGlue.\nCellos are constructed and repaired using hide glue, which is strong but reversible, allowing for disassembly when needed. Tops may be glued on with diluted glue since some repairs call for the removal of the top. Theoretically, hide glue is weaker than the body's wood, so as the top or back shrinks side-to-side, the glue holding it lets go and the plate does not crack. Cellists repairing cracks in their cello do not use regular wood glue, because it cannot be steamed open when a repair has to be made by a luthier.\nBow.\nTraditionally, bows are made from pernambuco or brazilwood. Both come from the same species of tree (\"Caesalpinia echinata\"), but Pernambuco, used for higher-quality bows, is the heartwood of the tree and is darker in color than brazilwood (which is sometimes stained to compensate). Pernambuco is a heavy, resinous wood with great elasticity, which makes it an ideal wood for instrument bows. Horsehair is stretched out between the two ends of the bow. The taut horsehair is drawn over the strings, while being held roughly parallel to the bridge and perpendicular to the strings, to produce sound. A small knob is twisted to increase or decrease the tension of the horsehair. The tension on the bow is released when the instrument is not being used. The amount of tension a cellist puts on the bow hair depends on the preferences of the player, the style of music being played, and for students, the preferences of their teacher.\nBows are also made from other materials, such as carbon fibre\u2014stronger than wood\u2014and fiberglass (often used to make inexpensive, lower-quality student bows). An average cello bow is long (shorter than a violin or viola bow) high (from the frog to the stick) and wide. The frog of a cello bow typically has a rounded corner like that of a viola bow, but is wider. A cello bow is roughly heavier than a viola bow, which in turn is roughly heavier than a violin bow. \nBow hair is traditionally horsehair, though synthetic hair, in varying colors, is also used. Prior to playing, the musician tightens the bow by turning a screw to pull the frog (the part of the bow under the hand) back and increase the tension of the hair. Rosin is applied by the player to make the hair sticky. Bows need to be re-haired periodically. Baroque-style (1600\u20131750) cello bows were much thicker and were formed with a larger outward arch than modern cello bows. The inward arch of a modern cello bow produces greater tension, which in turn produces a louder sound.\nThe cello bow has also been used to play electric guitars. Jimmy Page pioneered its application on tracks such as \"Dazed and Confused\". The post-rock Icelandic band Sigur R\u00f3s's lead singer often plays guitar using a cello bow.\nIn 1989, the German cellist Michael Bach began developing a curved bow, encouraged by John Cage, Dieter Schnebel, Mstislav Rostropovich and Luigi Colani: and since then many pieces have been composed especially for it. This curved bow (\"BACH.Bow\") is a convex curved bow which, unlike the ordinary bow, renders possible polyphonic playing on the various strings of the instrument. The solo repertoire for violin and cello by J. S. Bach the BACH.Bow is particularly suited to it: and it was developed with this in mind, polyphonic playing being required, as well as monophonic.\nPhysics.\nPhysical aspects.\nWhen a string is bowed or plucked, it vibrates and moves the air around it, producing sound waves. Because the string is quite thin, not much air is moved by the string itself, and consequently, if the string was not mounted on a hollow body, the sound would be weak. In acoustic stringed instruments such as the cello, this lack of volume is solved by mounting the vibrating string on a larger hollow wooden body. The vibrations are transmitted to the larger body, which can move more air and produce a louder sound. Different designs of the instrument produce variations in the instrument's vibrational patterns and thus change the character of the sound produced. A string's fundamental pitch can be adjusted by changing its stiffness, which depends on tension and length. Tightening a string stiffens it by increasing both the outward forces along its length and the net forces it experiences during a distortion. A cello can be tuned by adjusting the tension of its strings, by turning the tuning pegs mounted on its pegbox and tension adjusters (fine tuners) on the tailpiece.\nA string's length also affects its fundamental pitch. Shortening a string stiffens it by increasing its curvature during a distortion and subjecting it to larger net forces. Shortening the string also reduces its mass, but does not alter the mass per unit length, and it is the latter ratio rather than the total mass which governs the frequency. The string vibrates in a standing wave whose speed of propagation is given by formula_1, where is the tension and is the mass per unit length; there is a node at either end of the vibrating length, and thus the vibrating length is half a wavelength. Since the frequency of any wave is equal to the speed divided by the wavelength, we have formula_2. (Some writers, including Muncaster (cited below), use the Greek letter in place of .) Thus shortening a string increases the frequency, and thus the pitch. Because of this effect, you can raise and change the pitch of a string by pressing it against the fingerboard in the cello's neck and effectively shortening it. Likewise strings with less mass per unit length, if under the same tension, will have a higher frequency and thus higher pitch than more massive strings. This is a prime reason the different strings on all string instruments have different fundamental pitches, with the lightest strings having the highest pitches.\nA played note of E or F has a frequency that is often very close to the natural resonating frequency of the body of the instrument, and if the problem is not addressed this can set the body into near resonance. This may cause an unpleasant sudden amplification of this pitch, and additionally a loud beating sound results from the interference produced between these nearby frequencies; this is known as the \"wolf tone\" because it is an unpleasant growling sound. The wood resonance appears to be split into two frequencies by the driving force of the sounding string. These two periodic resonances beat with each other. This wolf tone must be eliminated or significantly reduced for the cello to play the nearby notes with a pleasant tone. This can be accomplished by modifying the cello front plate, attaching a wolf eliminator (a metal cylinder or a rubber cylinder encased in metal), or moving the soundpost.\nWhen a string is bowed or plucked to produce a note, the fundamental note is accompanied by higher frequency overtones. Each sound has a particular recipe of frequencies that combine to make the total sound.\nPlaying technique.\nPlaying the cello is done while seated with the instrument supported on the floor by the endpin. The right hand bows (or sometimes plucks) the strings to sound the notes. The left-hand fingertips stop the strings along their length, determining the pitch of each fingered note. Stopping the string closer to the bridge results in a higher-pitched sound because the vibrating string length has been shortened. On the contrary, a string stopped closer to the tuning pegs produces a lower sound. In the \"neck\" positions (which use just less than half of the fingerboard, nearest the top of the instrument), the thumb rests on the back of the neck, some people use their thumb as a marker of their position; in \"thumb position\" (a general name for notes on the remainder of the fingerboard) the thumb usually rests alongside the fingers on the string. Then, the side of the thumb is used to play notes. The fingers are normally held curved with each knuckle bent, with the fingertips in contact with the string. If a finger is required on two (or more) strings at once to play perfect fifths (in double stops or chords), it is used flat. The contact point can move slightly away from the nail to the finger's pad in slower or more expressive playing, allowing a fuller vibrato.\nVibrato is a small oscillation in the pitch of a note, usually considered an expressive technique. The closer towards the bridge the note is, the smaller the oscillation needed to create the effect. Harmonics played on the cello fall into two classes; natural and artificial. Natural harmonics are produced by lightly touching (but not depressing) the string at certain places and then bowing (or, rarely, plucking) the string. For example, the halfway point of the string will produce a harmonic that is one octave above the unfingered (open) string. Natural harmonics only produce notes that are part of the harmonic series on a particular string. Artificial harmonics (also called false harmonics or stopped harmonics), in which the player depresses the string fully with one finger while touching the same string lightly with another finger, can produce any note above middle C. \nGlissando (Italian for \"sliding\") is an effect achieved by sliding the finger up or down the fingerboard without releasing the string. This causes the pitch to rise and fall smoothly, without separate, discernible steps.\nIn cello playing, the bow is much like the breath of a wind instrument player. Arguably, it is a major factor in the expressiveness of the playing. The right hand holds the bow and controls the duration and character of the notes. In general, the bow is drawn across the strings roughly halfway between the end of the fingerboard and the bridge, in a direction perpendicular to the strings; however, the player may wish to move the bow's point of contact higher or lower depending on the desired sound. The bow is held and manipulated with all five fingers of the right hand, with the thumb opposite the fingers and closer to the cellist's body. Tone production and volume of sound depend on a combination of several factors. The four most important ones are \"weight\" applied to the string, the \"angle\" of the bow on the string, bow \"speed\", and the \"point of contact\" of the bow hair with the string (sometimes abbreviated WASP).\nDouble stops involve the playing of two notes simultaneously. Two strings are fingered at once, and the bow is drawn to sound them both. Often, in pizzicato playing, the string is plucked directly with the fingers or thumb of the right hand. However, the strings may be plucked with a finger of the left hand in certain advanced pieces, either so that the cellist can play bowed notes on another string along with pizzicato notes or because the speed of the piece would not allow the player sufficient time to pluck with the right hand. In musical notation, pizzicato is often abbreviated as \"pizz.\" The position of the hand in pizzicato is commonly slightly over the fingerboard and away from the bridge.\nA player using the col legno technique strikes or rubs the strings with the wood of the bow rather than the hair. In spiccato playing, the bow still moves in a horizontal motion on the string but is allowed to bounce, generating a lighter, somewhat more percussive sound. In staccato, the player moves the bow a small distance and stops it on the string, making a short sound, the rest of the written duration being taken up by silence. \nLegato is a technique in which notes are smoothly connected without breaks. It is indicated by a slur (curved line) above or below \u2013 depending on their position on the staff \u2013 the notes of the passage that is to be played legato.\n\"Sul ponticello\" (\"on the bridge\") refers to bowing closer to (or nearly on) the bridge, while \"sul tasto\" (\"on the fingerboard\") calls for bowing nearer to (or over) the end of the fingerboard. At its extreme, sul ponticello produces a harsh, shrill sound with emphasis on overtones and high harmonics. In contrast, sul tasto produces a more flute-like sound that emphasizes the note's fundamental frequency and produces softened overtones. Composers have used both techniques, particularly in an orchestral setting, for special sounds and effects.\nSizes.\nStandard-sized cellos are referred to as \"full-size\" or \"\" but are also made in smaller (fractional) sizes, including , , , , , , , and . The fractions refer to volume rather than length, so a size cello is much longer than half the length of a full size. The smaller cellos are identical to standard cellos in construction, range, and usage, but are simply scaled-down for the benefit of children and shorter adults.\nCellos in sizes larger than do exist, and cellists with unusually large hands may require such a non-standard instrument. Cellos made before tended to be considerably larger than those made and commonly played today. Around 1680, changes in string-making technology made it possible to play lower-pitched notes on shorter strings. The cellos of Stradivari, for example, can be clearly divided into two models: the style made before 1702, characterized by larger instruments (of which only three exist in their original size and configuration), and the style made during and after 1707, when Stradivari began making smaller cellos. This later model is the design most commonly used by modern luthiers. The scale length of a cello is about . The new size offered fuller tonal projection and a greater range of expression. The instrument in this form was able to contribute to more pieces musically and offered the possibility of greater physical dexterity for the player to develop technique.\nAccessories.\nThere are many accessories for the cello.\nInstrument makers.\nCellos are made by luthiers, specialists in building and repairing stringed instruments, ranging from guitars to violins. The following luthiers are notable for the cellos they have produced:\nCellists.\nA person who plays the cello is called a \"cellist\". For a list of notable cellists, see the list of cellists and .\nFamous instruments.\nSpecific instruments are famous (or become famous) for a variety of reasons. An instrument's notability may arise from its age, the fame of its maker, its physical appearance, its acoustic properties, and its use by notable performers. The most famous instruments are generally known for all of these things. The most highly prized instruments are now collector's items and are priced beyond the reach of most musicians. These instruments are typically owned by some kind of organization or investment group, which may loan the instrument to a notable performer. For example, the Davidov Stradivarius, which is currently in the possession of one of the most widely known living cellists, Yo-Yo Ma, is actually owned by the Vuitton Foundation.\nSome notable cellos:"}
{"id": "6559", "revid": "14994222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6559", "title": "Control store", "text": "A control store is the part of a CPU's control unit that stores the CPU's microprogram. It is usually accessed by a microsequencer. A control store implementation whose contents are unalterable is known as a Read Only Memory (ROM) or Read Only Storage (ROS); one whose contents are alterable is known as a Writable Control Store (WCS).\nImplementation.\nEarly use.\nEarly control stores were implemented as a diode-array accessed via address decoders, a form of read-only memory. This tradition dates back to the \"program timing matrix\" on the MIT Whirlwind, first described in 1947. Modern VLSI processors instead use matrices of field-effect transistors to build the ROM and/or PLA structures used to control the processor as well as its internal sequencer in a microcoded implementation. IBM System/360 used a variety of techniques: CCROS (Card Capacitor Read-Only Storage) on the Model 30, TROS (Transformer Read-Only Storage) on the Model 40, and BCROS (Balanced Capacitor Read-Only Storage) on Models 50, 65 and 67.\nWritable stores.\nSome computers are built using \"writable microcode\" \u2014 rather than storing the microcode in ROM or hard-wired logic, the microcode is stored in a RAM called a \"writable control store\" or \"WCS\". Such a computer is sometimes called a \"Writable Instruction Set Computer\" or \"WISC\". Many of these machines were experimental laboratory prototypes, such as the WISC CPU/16 and the RTX 32P.\nThe original System/360 models have read-only control store, but later System/360, System/370 and successor models load part or all of their microprograms from floppy disks or other DASD into a writable control store consisting of ultra-high speed random-access read\u2013write memory. The System/370 architecture includes a facility called Initial-Microprogram Load (IML or IMPL) that can be invoked from the console, as part of Power On Reset (POR) or from another processor in a tightly coupled multiprocessor complex. This permitted IBM to easily repair microprogramming defects in the field. Even when the majority of the control store is stored in ROM, computer vendors would often sell writable control store as an option, allowing the customers to customize the machine's microprogram. Other vendors, e.g., IBM, use the WCS to run microcode for emulator features and hardware diagnostics.\nOther commercial machines that use writable microcode include the Burroughs Small Systems (1970s and 1980s), the Xerox processors in their Lisp machines and Xerox Star workstations, the DEC VAX 8800 (\"Nautilus\") family, and the Symbolics L- and G-machines (1980s). Some DEC PDP-10 machines store their microcode in SRAM chips (about 80 bits wide x 2 Kwords), which is typically loaded on power-on through some other front-end CPU. Many more machines offer user-programmable writable control stores as an option (including the HP 2100, DEC PDP-11/60 and Varian Data Machines V-70 series minicomputers).\nThe Mentec M11 and Mentec M1 store its microcode in SRAM chips, loaded on power-on through another CPU.\nThe Data General Eclipse MV/8000 (\"Eagle\") has a SRAM writable control store, loaded on power-on through another CPU.\nWCS offers several advantages including the ease of patching the microprogram and, for certain hardware generations, faster access than ROMs could provide. User-programmable WCS allow the user to optimize the machine for specific purposes. However, it also had the disadvantage of making it harder to debug programs, and making it possible for malicious users to negatively affect the system and data.\nSome CPU designs compile the instruction set to a writable RAM or FLASH inside the CPU (such as the Rekursiv processor and the Imsys Cjip), or an FPGA (reconfigurable computing).\nSeveral Intel CPUs in the x86 architecture family have writable microcode, starting with the Pentium Pro in 1995.\nThis has allowed bugs in the Intel Core 2 microcode and Intel Xeon microcode to be fixed in software, rather than requiring the entire chip to be replaced.\nSuch fixes can be installed by Linux, FreeBSD, Microsoft Windows, or the motherboard BIOS.\nTiming, latching and avoiding a race condition.\nThe control store usually has a register on its outputs. The outputs that go back into the sequencer to determine the next address have to go through some sort of register to prevent the creation of a race condition.\nIn most designs all of the other bits also go through a register. This is because the machine will work faster if the execution of the next microinstruction is delayed by one cycle. This register is known as a pipeline register. Very often the execution of the next microinstruction is dependent on the result of the current microinstruction, which will not be stable until the end of the current microcycle. It can be seen that either way, all of the outputs of the control store go into one big register. Historically it used to be possible to buy EPROMs with these register bits on the same chip.\nThe clock signal determining the clock rate, which is the cycle time of the system, primarily clocks this register."}
{"id": "6561", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6561", "title": "Columba", "text": "Columba () or Colmcille (7 December 521 \u2013 9 June 597 AD) was an Irish abbot and missionary evangelist credited with spreading Christianity in what is today Scotland at the start of the Hiberno-Scottish mission. He founded the important abbey on Iona, which became a dominant religious and political institution in the region for centuries. He is the patron saint of Derry. He was highly regarded by both the Gaels of D\u00e1l Riata and the Picts, and is remembered today as a Catholic saint and one of the Twelve Apostles of Ireland.\nColumba studied under some of Ireland's most prominent church figures and founded several monasteries in the country. Around 563 AD he and his twelve companions crossed to Dunaverty near Southend, Argyll, in Kintyre before settling in Iona in Scotland, then part of the Ulster kingdom of D\u00e1l Riata, where they founded a new abbey as a base for spreading Celtic Christianity among the pagan Northern Pictish kingdoms. He remained active in Irish politics, though he spent most of the remainder of his life in Scotland. Three surviving early-medieval Latin hymns are attributed to him.\nEarly life in Ireland.\nColumba was born to Fedlimid and Eithne of the \"Cen\u00e9l Conaill\" in Gartan, a district beside Lough Gartan, in T\u00edr Chonaill (mainly modern County Donegal) in what is now Ulster, the northern province in Ireland. On his father's side, he is claimed as being the great-great-grandson of Niall of the Nine Hostages, a pseudo-historical Irish high king of the 5th century. Tradition holds that he was born in Gartan. One tradition holds that he was born on a flagstone called \"Leac na Cumha\" in the townland of Lacknacoo. He was baptised in Temple-Douglas, in the County Donegal parish of Conwal (midway between Gartan and Letterkenny), by his teacher and foster-uncle Cruithnech\u00e1n.\nColumba lived in the remote district of what is now Glencolmcille for roughly five years, which was named after him. It is not known for sure if his name at birth was Colmcille or if he adopted this name later in life; Adomn\u00e1n (Eunan) of Iona thought it was his birth name but other Irish sources have claimed his name at birth was Crimthann (meaning 'fox'). In the Irish language his name means 'dove', which is the same name as the Prophet Jonah (Jonah in Hebrew is also 'dove'), which Adomn\u00e1n of Iona, as well as other early Irish writers, were aware of, although it is not clear if he was deliberately named after Jonah or not. \"Columba\" is also Latin for dove. (See also the bird genus \"Columba\".)\nWhen sufficiently advanced in letters he entered the monastic school of Movilla, at Newtownards, under Finnian of Movilla who had studied at Ninian's \"Magnum Monasterium\" on the shores of Galloway. He was about twenty, and a deacon when, having completed his training at Movilla, he travelled southwards into Leinster, where he became a pupil of an aged bard named Gemman. On leaving him, Columba entered the monastery of Clonard, governed at that time by Finnian, noted for sanctity and learning. Here he imbibed the traditions of the Welsh Church, for Finnian had been trained in the schools of David.\nThe study of Latin learning and Christian theology in monasteries flourished. Columba became a pupil at the monastic school at Clonard Abbey, situated on the River Boyne in modern County Meath. During the sixth century, some of the most significant names in the history of Celtic Christianity studied at the Clonard monastery. The average number of scholars under instruction at Clonard was said to be 300. Columba was one of twelve students of Finnian of Clonard who became known as the Twelve Apostles of Ireland. He became a monk and eventually was ordained a priest.\nAnother preceptor of Columba was Mobh\u00ed Cl\u00e1rainech, whose monastery at Glasnevin was frequented by such famous men as Cainnech of Aghaboe, Comgall, and Ciar\u00e1n. A pestilence which devastated Ireland in 544 caused the dispersion of Mobhi's disciples, and Columba returned to Ulster, the land of his kindred. He was a striking figure of great stature and powerful build, with a loud, melodious voice which could be heard from one hilltop to another.\nThe foundation of several important monasteries marked the following years: Derry, at the southern edge of Inishowen; Durrow, County Offaly; Kells, County Meath; and Swords. While at Derry it is said that he planned a pilgrimage to Rome and Jerusalem, but did not proceed farther than Tours. From Tours, he brought a copy of those gospels that had lain on the bosom of Martin for 100 years. This relic was deposited in Derry. St Colmcille is also believed to have established a Church on Inishkea North, County Mayo which is named St Colmcille's Church.\nSome traditions assert that sometime around 560 Columba became involved in a quarrel with Finnian of Moville of Movilla Abbey over a psalter. Columba copied the manuscript at the scriptorium under Finnian, intending to keep the copy. Finnian disputed his right to keep it. There is a suggestion that this conflict resulted in the Battle of C\u00fal Dreimhne in Cairbre Drom Cliabh (now in County Sligo) in 561, during which many men were killed. Richard Sharpe, translator of Adomn\u00e1n's Life of St. Columba (referenced in the bibliography below) makes a stern caution at this point against accepting the many references that link the battle and Columba's leaving of Ireland, even though there is evidence in the annals that Columba supported his own king against the high king. Political conflicts that had existed for some time resulted in the clan Neill's battle against King Diarmait at Cooldrevny in 561. An issue, for example, was the king's violation of the right of sanctuary belonging to Columba's person as a monk on the occasion of the murder of Prince Curnan, Columba's kinsman.\nPrince Curnan of Connacht, who had fatally injured a rival in a hurling match and had taken refuge with Columba, was dragged from his protector's arms and slain by Diarmaid's men, in defiance of the rights of sanctuary.\nA synod of clerics and scholars threatened to excommunicate him for these deaths, but Brendan of Birr spoke on his behalf. Eventually, the process was deemed a miscarriage of justice. Columba's own conscience was uneasy, and on the advice of an aged hermit, Molaise, he resolved to expiate his sense of offence by departing Ireland. The term \"exile\" is used in some references. This, too, can be disputed, for the term \"pilgrimage\" is used more frequently in the literature about him. A marker at Stroove Beach on the Inishowen Peninsula commemorates the place where Columba set sail for Scotland. He left Ireland, but through the following years, he returned several times to visit the communities he had founded there.\nColumba's copy of the psalter has been traditionally associated with the Cathach of St. Columba. In 574/575, during his return for the Synod of Drum Ceat, he founded the monastery of Drumcliff in Cairbre, now County Sligo.\nScotland.\nIn 563, he travelled to Scotland with twelve companions (said to include Odran of Iona) in a wicker currach covered with leather. According to legend he first landed on the Kintyre Peninsula, near Southend. However, being still in sight of Ulster, he moved farther north up the west coast of Scotland. The island of Iona was made over to him by his kinsman Conall mac Comgaill King of D\u00e1l Riata, who perhaps had invited him to come to Scotland in the first place. However, there is a sense in which he was not leaving his native people, as the Ulster Gaels had been inhabiting the west coast of Scotland for the previous couple of centuries. Aside from the services he provided guiding the only centre of literacy in the region, his reputation as a holy man led to his role as a diplomat among the tribes.\nThere are also many stories of miracles which he performed during his work to convert the Picts, the most famous being his encounter with an unidentified animal that some have equated with the Loch Ness Monster in 565. It is said that he banished a ferocious \"water beast\" to the depths of the River Ness after it had killed a Pict and then tried to attack Columba's disciple, Lugne (see Vita Columbae Book 2 below). He visited the pagan King Bridei, King of Fortriu, at his base in Inverness, winning Bridei's respect, although not his conversion. He subsequently played a major role in the politics of the country.\nHe was also very energetic in his work as a missionary, and, in addition to founding several churches in the Hebrides, he worked to turn his monastery at Iona into a school for missionaries. He was a renowned man of letters, having written several hymns and being credited with having transcribed 300 books. One of the few, if not the only, times he left Scotland was towards the end of his life, when he returned to Ireland to found the monastery at Durrow.\nAccording to traditional sources, Columba died in Iona on Sunday, 9 June 597, and was buried by his monks in the abbey he created. However, Dr. Daniel P. Mc Carthy disputes this and assigns a date of 593 to Columba's death. The Annals record the first raid made upon Iona in 795, with further raids occurring in 802, 806 and 825. Columba's relics were finally removed in 849 and divided between Scotland and Ireland.\nLegacy.\nIreland.\nIn Ireland, the saint is commonly known as Colmcille.\nColmcille is one of the three patron saints of Ireland, after Patrick and Brigid of Kildare.\nColmcille is the patron saint of the city of Derry, where he founded a monastic settlement in c. 540. The name of the city in Irish is \"Doire Cholm Cille\" and is derived from the native oak trees in the area and the city's association with Colmcille. The Catholic Church of Saint Colmcille's Long Tower, and the Church of Ireland St Augustine's Church both claim to stand at the spot of this original settlement. The Church of Ireland Cathedral, St. Columb's Cathedral, and the largest park in the city, St. Columb's Park, are named in his honour. The Catholic Boys' Grammar School, St. Columb's College, has him as Patron and namesake.\nSt. Columba's National School in Drumcondra is a girls' school named after the saint.\nSt. Colmcille's Primary School and St. Colmcille's Community School are two schools in Knocklyon, Dublin, named after him, with the former having an annual day dedicated to the saint on 9 June.\nThe town of Swords, Dublin was reputedly founded by Colmcille in 560 AD. St. Colmcille's Boys' National School and St. Colmcille's Girls' National School, both located in the town of Swords, are also named after the Saint as is one of the local gaelic teams, Naomh Colmcille.\nThe Columba Press, a religious and spiritual book company based in Dublin, is named after Colmcille.\nAer Lingus, Ireland's national flag carrier has named one of its Airbus A330 aircraft in commemoration of the saint (reg: EI-DUO).\nScotland.\nColumba is credited as being a leading figure in the revitalisation of monasticism. The Clan Malcolm/Clan McCallum claims its name from Columba and was reputedly founded by the descendants of his original followers. It is also said that Clan Robertson Clan Donnachaidh / Duncan are heirs of Columba. Clan MacKinnon may also have some claim to being spiritual descendants of St Columba. Sir Iain Moncreiffe of that Ilk speculated that Clan MacKinnon belonged to the kindred of Columba, noting the MacKinnon Arms bore the hand of Columba holding the Cross, and the several Mackinnon abbots of Iona. The MacKinnons included Green Abbots who were never priests and who were corrupt. The Macdonald Lords of the Isles dealt with them, imprisoning one who was convicted of treachery since Iona was the spiritual seat of Clan Donald.\nThe cathedral of the Catholic Diocese of Argyll and the Isles is placed under the patronage of Saint Columba, as are numerous Catholic schools and parishes throughout the nation. The Scottish Episcopal Church, the Church of Scotland, and the Evangelical Lutheran Church of England also have parishes dedicated to him. The village of Kilmacolm in Renfrewshire is also derived from Colmcille's name.\nSt Columba's Hospice, a prominent hospice in Edinburgh, is named after the saint.\nPoetry.\nColumba currently has two poems attributed to him: \"Adiutor Laborantium\" and \"Altus Prosator\". Both poems are examples of Abecedarian hymns in Latin written while Columba was at the Iona Abbey.\nThe shorter of the two poems, \"Adiutor Laborantium\" consists of twenty-seven lines of eight syllables each, with each line following the format of an Abecedarian hymn using the Classical Latin alphabet save for lines 10\u201311 and 25\u201327. The content of the poem addresses God as a helper, ruler, guard, defender and lifter for those who are good and an enemy of sinners whom he will punish.\n\"Altus Prosator\" consists of twenty-three stanzas sixteen syllables long, with the first containing seven lines and six lines in each subsequent stanza. It uses the same format and alphabet as \"Adiutor Laborantium\" except with each stanza starting with a different letter rather than each line. The poem tells a story over three parts split into the beginning of time, the history of Creation, and the Apocalypse or end of time.\nOther.\nColumba is honoured in the Anglican communion, including the Church of England and the Episcopal Church, on 9 June. The Church of St. Columba in Ottawa is part of the Anglican Diocese of Ottawa. St. Columba Anglican Church is located in Tofino, British Columbia.\nSt. Columba's Episcopal Church is in Washington, D.C. There is a St. Columba's Presbyterian Church in Peppermint Grove, Washington. The Saint-Columba Presbyterian Church in Palmerstone, Vacoas-Phoenix is part of the Presbyterian Church in Mauritius.\nColumba is the patron saint of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Youngstown, Ohio. The Cathedral there is named for him. Iona University, in New Rochelle, New York, is named after the island on which Columba established his first monastery in Scotland, as is Iona College in Windsor, Ontario, Iona Presentation College, Perth, and Iona College Geelong in Charlemont, Victoria.\nIn Bangor, Pennsylvania, there is a megalith park called Columcille, which is open to the public.\nThere are at least four pipe bands named for him; one each from Tullamore, Ireland, from Derry, Northern Ireland, from Kearny, New Jersey, and from Cape Cod, Massachusetts.\nSt. Columba's School, one of the most prominent English-Medium schools in India, run by the Irish Christian Brothers, is also named after the saint.\nThe Munich GAA is named M\u00fcnchen Colmcilles.\nSaint Columba's Feast Day, 9 June, has been designated as International Celtic Art Day. The Book of Kells and the Book of Durrow, great medieval masterpieces of Celtic art, are associated with Columba.\nBenjamin Britten composed \"A Hymn of St Columba\" for choir and organ in 1962, setting a poem by the saint, on the occasion of the 1,400th anniversary of his voyage to Iona.\nSources.\nThe main source of information about Columba's life is the \"Life of Columba\" (), a hagiography written by Adomn\u00e1n, one of Columba's successors at Iona, in the style of \"saints' lives\" narratives that had become widespread throughout medieval Europe. Both the \"Life of Columba\" and Bede (672/673\u2013735) record Columba's visit to Bridei. Whereas Adomn\u00e1n just tells us that Columba visited Bridei, Bede relates a later, perhaps Pictish tradition, whereby Columba actually converts the Pictish king. Another early source is a poem in praise of Columba, most probably commissioned by Columba's kinsman, the King of the U\u00ed N\u00e9ill clan. It was almost certainly written within three or four years of Columba's death and is the earliest vernacular poem in European history. It consists of twenty-five stanzas of four verses of seven syllables each, called the Amra Coluim Chille.\nThrough the reputation of its venerable founder and its position as a major European centre of learning, Columba's Iona became a place of pilgrimage. Columba is historically revered as a warrior saint and was often invoked for victory in battle. Some of his relics were removed in 849 and divided between Alba and Ireland. Relics of Columba were carried before Scottish armies in the reliquary made at Iona in the mid-8th century called the Brecbennoch. Legend has it that the Brecbennoch was carried to the Battle of Bannockburn (24 June 1314) by the vastly outnumbered Scots army and the intercession of Columba helped them to victory. Since the 19th century the \"Brecbennoch of St. Columba\" has been identified with the Monymusk Reliquary, although this is now doubted by scholars.\nIn the Antiphoner of Inchcolm Abbey, the \"Iona of the East\" (situated on an island in the Firth of Forth), a 14th-century prayer begins \"O Columba spes Scotorum...\" \"O Columba, hope of the Scots\"."}
{"id": "6562", "revid": "9813438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6562", "title": "Conditional proof", "text": "A conditional proof is a proof that takes the form of asserting a conditional, and proving that the antecedent of the conditional necessarily leads to the consequent.\nOverview.\nThe assumed antecedent of a conditional proof is called the conditional proof assumption (CPA). Thus, the goal of a conditional proof is to demonstrate that if the CPA were true, then the desired conclusion necessarily follows. The validity of a conditional proof does not require that the CPA be true, only that \"if it were true\" it would lead to the consequent.\nConditional proofs are of great importance in mathematics. Conditional proofs exist linking several otherwise unproven conjectures, so that a proof of one conjecture may immediately imply the validity of several others. It can be much easier to show a proposition's truth to follow from another proposition than to prove it independently.\nA famous network of conditional proofs is the NP-complete class of complexity theory. There is a large number of interesting tasks (see \"List of NP-complete problems\"), and while it is not known if a polynomial-time solution exists for any of them, it is known that if such a solution exists for some of them, one exists for all of them. Similarly, the Riemann hypothesis has many consequences already proven.\nSymbolic logic.\nAs an example of a conditional proof in symbolic logic, suppose we want to prove A \u2192 C (if A, then C) from the first two premises below:"}
{"id": "6563", "revid": "11015197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6563", "title": "Conjunction introduction", "text": "Conjunction introduction (often abbreviated simply as conjunction and also called and introduction or adjunction) is a valid rule of inference of propositional logic. The rule makes it possible to introduce a conjunction into a logical proof. It is the inference that if the proposition formula_1 is true, and the proposition formula_2 is true, then the logical conjunction of the two propositions formula_1 and formula_2 is true. For example, if it is true that \"it is raining\", and it is true that \"the cat is inside\", then it is true that \"it is raining and the cat is inside\". The rule can be stated:\nwhere the rule is that wherever an instance of \"formula_1\" and \"formula_2\" appear on lines of a proof, a \"formula_8\" can be placed on a subsequent line.\nFormal notation.\nThe \"conjunction introduction\" rule may be written in sequent notation:\nwhere formula_1 and formula_2 are propositions expressed in some formal system, and formula_12 is a metalogical symbol meaning that formula_8 is a syntactic consequence if formula_1 and formula_2 are each on lines of a proof in some logical system;"}
{"id": "6564", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6564", "title": "Conjunction elimination (propositional logic)", "text": ""}
{"id": "6566", "revid": "140154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6566", "title": "English in the Commonwealth of Nations", "text": "The use of the English language in current and former Commonwealth countries was largely inherited from British colonisation, with some exceptions. English serves as the medium of inter-Commonwealth relations and the language forms part of the common culture of the Commonwealth.\nCommonwealth English refers to English as practised in the Commonwealth; the term is most often interchangeable with \"British English\", but is also used to distinguish between British English and that in the rest of the Commonwealth. English in the Commonwealth is diverse, and many regions have developed their own local varieties of the language. In Cyprus, it does not have official status but is widely used as a . English is spoken as a first or second language in most of the Commonwealth.\nWritten English in the current and former Commonwealth generally favours British English spelling as opposed to American English, with some exceptions, particularly in Canada, where there are strong influences from neighbouring American English. Few Commonwealth countries besides Australia, Canada, South Africa, and the United Kingdom have produced their own English dictionaries and style guides, and may rely on those produced in other countries.\nNative varieties.\nSouthern Hemisphere native varieties of English began to develop during the 18th century, with the colonisation of Australasia and South Africa. Australian English and New Zealand English are closely related to each other and share some similarities with South African English (though it has unique influences from indigenous African languages, and Dutch influences it inherited along with the development of Afrikaans from Dutch).\nCanadian English contains elements of British English and American English, as well as many Canadianisms and some French influences. It is the product of several waves of immigration and settlement, from Britain, Ireland, France, the United States, and around the world, over a period of more than two centuries. Modern Canadian English has taken significant vocabulary and spelling from the shared political and social institutions of Commonwealth countries.\nCaribbean.\nCaribbean English is influenced by the English-based Creole varieties spoken, but they are not one and the same. There is a great deal of variation in the way English is spoken, with a \"Standard English\" at one end of a linguistic continuum and Creole languages at the other. These dialects have roots in 17th-century British and Irish English, and African languages, plus localised influences from other colonial languages including French, Spanish, and Dutch; unlike most native varieties of English, West Indian dialects often tend to be syllable-timed rather than stress-timed.\nNon-native varieties.\nSecond-language varieties of English in Africa and Asia have often undergone \"indigenisation\"; that is, each English-speaking community has developed (or is in the process of developing) its own standards of usage, often under the influence of local languages. These dialects are sometimes referred to as \"New Englishes\" (McArthur, p.\u00a036); most of them inherited non-rhoticity from Southern British English.\nAfrica.\nSeveral dialects of West African English exist, with a lot of regional variation and some influence from indigenous languages. West African English tends to be syllable-timed, and its phoneme inventory is much simpler than that of Received Pronunciation; this sometimes affects mutual intelligibility with native varieties of English. A distinctive Southeast African English, often with significant influences from Bantu languages such as Swahili, is spoken in countries such as Kenya, Uganda, and Tanzania, particularly in Nairobi and other cities where there is an expanding middle class, for whom English is increasingly being used in the home as the first language.\nSmall communities of native English speakers can be found in Zimbabwe, Botswana, and Namibia; the dialects spoken are similar to native South African English.\nPrior to Togo's admission at the 2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, Togolese Foreign Minister Robert Dussey said that he expected Commonwealth membership to provide opportunities for Togolese citizens to learn English, and remarked that the country sought closer ties with the Anglophone world.\nAsia.\nHong Kong.\nHong Kong ceased to be part of the Commonwealth (by virtue of being a British territory) in 1997. Nonetheless, the English language there still enjoys official status.\nIndian subcontinent.\nEnglish was introduced to the subcontinent by the British Raj. Among the partitioned post-independent countries, India has the largest English-speaking population in the Commonwealth, although comparatively very few speakers of Indian English are first-language speakers. The same is true of English spoken in other parts of South Asia, e.g. Pakistani English, Sri Lankan English, Bangladeshi English and Myanmar English. South Asian English phonology is highly variable; stress, rhythm and intonation are generally different from those of native varieties. There are also several peculiarities at the levels of morphology, syntax and usage, some of which can also be found among educated speakers.\nMalay Archipelago.\nSoutheast Asian English comprises Singapore English, Malaysian English, and Brunei English; it features some influence from Malay and Chinese languages, as well as Indian English.\nSee also.\nOther languages:"}
{"id": "6569", "revid": "1257275895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6569", "title": "Charles McCarry", "text": "Charles McCarry (June 14, 1930 \u2013 February 26, 2019) was an American writer, primarily of spy fiction, and a former undercover operative for the Central Intelligence Agency.\nBiography.\nMcCarry's family came from The Berkshires area of western Massachusetts. He was born in Pittsfield, and lived in Virginia. He graduated from Dalton High School.\nMcCarry began his writing career in the United States Army as a correspondent for \"Stars and Stripes\". He served from 1948 to 1951 and achieved the rank of sergeant. He received initial training at Fort Benning, Georgia, and was stationed in Germany for almost two years and at Camp Pickett, Virginia for about a year.\nAfter his army service, he was a speechwriter in the early Administration of President Dwight D. Eisenhower. In 1958, at the invitation of Cord Meyer, he accepted a post with the CIA, for whom he traveled the globe as a deep cover operative. He took a leave of absence to work for the 1960 Nixon campaign, writing for vice-presidential candidate Henry Cabot Lodge. He left the CIA for the last time in 1967, becoming a writer of spy novels.\nMcCarry was also an editor-at-large for \"National Geographic\" and contributed pieces to \"The New York Times\", \"The Wall Street Journal\", \"The Washington Post\", the \"Saturday Evening Post\", and other national publications.\nApproach to writing.\nMcCarry believed that \"the best novels are about ordinary things: love, betrayal, death, trust, loneliness, marriage, fatherhood.\" In 1988 McCarry described the themes of his novels to date as \"ordinary things \u2013 love, death, betrayal and the American dream.\"\nMcCarry wrote that: \"After I resigned [from the CIA], intending to spend the rest of my life writing fiction and knowing what tricks the mind can play when the gates are thrown wide open, as they are by the act of writing, between the imagination and that part of the brain in which information is stored, I took the precaution of writing a closely remembered narrative of my clandestine experiences. After correcting the manuscript, I burned it. What I kept for my own use was the atmosphere of secret life: How it worked on the five senses and what it did to the heart and mind. All the rest went up in flames, setting me free henceforth to make it all up. In all important matters, such as the creation of characters and the invention of plots, with rare and minor exceptions, that is what I have done. And, as might be expected, when I have been weak enough to use something that really happened as an episode in a novel, it is that piece of scrap, buried in a landfill of the imaginary, readers invariably refuse to believe.\"\nMcCarry was an admirer of the work of Eric Ambler and W. Somerset Maugham, especially the latter's stories. He was also an admirer of Richard Condon, author of \"The Manchurian Candidate\" (1959).\nPaul Christopher series.\nTen of McCarry's novels involve the life story of a fictional character named Paul Christopher, who grew up in pre-Nazi Germany, and later served in the Marines and became an operative for a U.S. government entity known as \"the Outfit\", meant to represent the Central Intelligence Agency.\nThese books are, in order of publication:\nAlternately, in chronological order of events depicted:\nReception.\n\"The Wall Street Journal\" described McCarry in 2013 as \"the dean of American spy writers\". \"The New Republic\" magazine called him \"poet laureate of the CIA\"; and Otto Penzler described him as \"the greatest espionage writer that America has ever produced.\" Jonathan Yardley, Pulitzer Prize-winning critic for the \"Washington Post\", calls him a \"'serious' novelist\" whose work may include \"the best novel ever written about life in high-stakes Washington, D.C.\" In 2004 P. J. O'Rourke called him \"the best modern writer on the subject of intrigue.\"\nAdaptations.\nThe film \"Wrong is Right\" (1982), starring Sean Connery, was loosely based on McCarry's novel, \"The Better Angels\" (1979).\nOther books and publications.\nCollections including McCarry's work.\nOtto Penzler, editor:"}
{"id": "6571", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6571", "title": "Cimbri", "text": "The Cimbri (, ; ) were an ancient tribe in Europe. Ancient authors described them variously as a Celtic, Gaulish, Germanic, or even Cimmerian people. Several ancient sources indicate that they lived in Jutland, which in some classical texts was called the Cimbrian peninsula. There is no direct evidence for the language they spoke, though some scholars argue that it was a Germanic language, while others argue that it was Celtic.\nTogether with the Teutones and the Ambrones, they fought the Roman Republic between 113 and 101 BC during the Cimbrian War. The Cimbri were initially successful, particularly at the Battle of Arausio, in which a large Roman army was routed. They then raided large areas in Gaul and Hispania. In 101 BC, during an attempted invasion of the Italian peninsula, the Cimbri were decisively defeated at the Battle of Vercellae by Gaius Marius, and their king, Boiorix, was killed. Some of the surviving captives are reported to have been among the rebellious gladiators in the Third Servile War.\nName.\nThe origin of the name \"Cimbri\" is unknown. One etymology is , from \"home\" (English \"home\"), itself a derivation from \"live\" (, ); then, the Germanic finds an exact cognate in Slavic \"s\u0119br\u044a\" \"farmer\" (Croatian, Serbian \"sebar\", Belorussian \u0441\u044f\u0431\u0451\u0440 \"syabyor\").\nThe name has also been related to the word \"kimme\" meaning \"rim\", i.e., \"the people of the coast\". Finally, since Antiquity, the name has been related to that of the Cimmerians.\nThe name of the Danish region Himmerland (Old Danish \"Himbersysel\") has been proposed to be a derivative of their name. According to such proposals, the word \"Cimbri\" with a \"c\" would be an older form before Grimm's law (PIE \"k\" &gt; Germanic \"h\"). Alternatively, Latin \"c-\" represents an attempt to render the unfamiliar Proto-Germanic \"h\" = (Latin \"h\" was but was becoming silent in common speech at the time), perhaps due to Celtic-speaking interpreters (a Celtic intermediary could also explain why one proposed etymology for the Teutons, Germanic \"*\u00deeu\u00f0an\u014dz\", became Latin \"Teutones\").\nBecause of the similarity of the names, the Cimbri have been at times associated with Cymry, the Welsh name for themselves. However, \"Cymry\" is derived from Brittonic \"*Kombrogi\" (cf. Allobroges), meaning \"compatriots\", and is linguistically unrelated to Cimbri.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nScholars generally see the Cimbri as originating in Jutland, but archaeologists have found no clear indications of any mass migration from Jutland in the early Iron Age. The Gundestrup Cauldron, which was deposited in a bog in Himmerland in the 2nd or 1st century BC, shows that there was some sort of contact with southeastern Europe, but it is uncertain if this contact can be associated with the Cimbrian militia expeditions against Rome of the 1st Century BC. It is known that the peoples of Northern Europe and the British Isles participated in annual partial population seasonal Winter migrations southward to what is now central Iberia and southern France where goods and resources were traded and cross-culture marriages were arranged.\nAdvocates for a northern homeland point to Greek and Roman sources that associate the Cimbri with the Jutland peninsula. According to the \"Res gestae\" (ch. 26) of Augustus, the Cimbri were still found in the area around the turn of the 1st century AD:\nThe contemporary Greek geographer Strabo testified that the Cimbri still existed as a Germanic tribe, presumably in the \"Cimbric peninsula\" (since they are said to live by the North Sea and to have paid tribute to Augustus):\nOn the map of Ptolemy, the \"Kimbroi\" are placed on the northernmost part of the peninsula of Jutland, i.e., in the modern landscape of Himmerland south of Limfjorden (since Vendsyssel-Thy north of the fjord was at that time a group of islands).\nMigration.\nSome time before 100 BC many of the Cimbri, as well as the Teutons and Ambrones, migrated south-east. After several unsuccessful battles with the Boii and other Celtic tribes, they appeared 113 BC in Noricum, where they invaded the lands of one of Rome's allies, the Taurisci.\nOn the request of the Roman consul Gnaeus Papirius Carbo, sent to defend the Taurisci, they retreated, only to find themselves deceived and attacked at the Battle of Noreia, where they defeated the Romans. Only a storm, which separated the combatants, saved the Roman forces from complete annihilation.\nInvading Gaul.\nNow the road to Italy was open, but they turned west towards Gaul. They came into frequent conflict with the Romans, who usually came out the losers. In 109 BC, they defeated a Roman army under the consul Marcus Junius Silanus, who was the commander of Gallia Narbonensis. In 107 BC they defeated another Roman army under the consul Gaius Cassius Longinus, who was killed at the Battle of Burdigala (modern day Bordeaux) against the Tigurini, who were allies of the Cimbri.\nAttacking the Roman Republic.\nIt was not until 105 BC that they planned an attack on the Roman Republic itself. At the Rh\u00f4ne, the Cimbri clashed with the Roman armies. Discord between the Roman commanders, the proconsul Quintus Servilius Caepio and the consul Gnaeus Mallius Maximus, hindered Roman coordination and so the Cimbri succeeded in first defeating the legate Marcus Aurelius Scaurus and later inflicted a devastating defeat on Caepio and Maximus at the Battle of Arausio. The Romans lost as many as 80,000 men, according to Livy; Mommsen (in his \"History of Rome\") thought that excluded auxiliary cavalry and non-combatants who brought the total loss closer to 112,000. Other estimates are much smaller, but by any account a large Roman army was routed.\nRome was in panic, and the \"terror cimbricus\" became proverbial. Everyone expected to soon see the \"new Gauls\" outside of the gates of Rome. Desperate measures were taken: contrary to the Roman constitution, Gaius Marius, who had defeated Jugurtha, was elected consul and supreme commander for five years in a row (104\u2013100 BC).\nDefeat.\nIn 104\u2013103 BC, the Cimbri had turned to the Iberian Peninsula where they pillaged far and wide, until they were confronted by a coalition of Celtiberians. Defeated, the Cimbri returned to Gaul, where they joined their allies, the Teutons. During this time, C. Marius had the time to prepare and, in 102 BC, he was ready to meet the Teutons and the Ambrones at the Rh\u00f4ne. These two tribes intended to pass into Italy through the western passes, while the Cimbri and the Tigurines were to take the northern route across the Rhine and later across the Central Eastern Alps.\nAt the estuary of the Is\u00e8re, the Teutons and the Ambrones met Marius, whose well-defended camp they did not manage to overrun. Instead, they pursued their route, and Marius followed them. At Aquae Sextiae, the Romans won two battles and took the Teuton king Teutobod prisoner.\nThe Cimbri had penetrated through the Alps into northern Italy. The consul Quintus Lutatius Catulus had not dared to fortify the passes, but instead he had retreated behind the river Po, and so the land was open to the invaders. The Cimbri did not hurry, and the victors of Aquae Sextiae had the time to arrive with reinforcements. At the Battle of Vercellae, at the confluence of the river Sesia with the Po, in 101 BC, the long voyage of the Cimbri also came to an end.\nIt was a devastating defeat. Two chieftains, Lugius and Boiorix, died on the field, while the other chieftains Caesorix and Claodicus were captured. The women killed both themselves and their children in order to avoid slavery. The Cimbri were annihilated, although some may have survived to return to the homeland where a population with this name was residing in northern Jutland in the 1st century AD, according to the sources quoted above. Some of the surviving captives are reported to have been among the rebelling gladiators in the Third Servile War.\nJustin's epitome of Trogus has Mithridates the Great send emissaries to the Cimbri to request military aid during the Social War (91-88 BCE). Justin also states that the Cimbri were again in Italy at this time, i.e. over ten years later.\nSupposed descendants.\nAccording to Julius Caesar, the Belgian tribe of the Atuatuci \"was descended from the Cimbri and Teutoni, who, upon their march into our province and Italy, set down such of their stock and stuff as they could not drive or carry with them on the near (i.e. west) side of the Rhine, and left six thousand men of their company there as guard and garrison\" (\"Gall.\" 2.29, trans. Edwards). They founded the city of Atuatuca in the land of the Belgic Eburones, whom they dominated. Thus Ambiorix king of the Eburones paid tribute and gave his son and nephew as hostages to the Atuatuci (\"Gall.\" 6.27). In the first century AD, the Eburones were replaced or absorbed by the Germanic Tungri, and the city was known as Atuatuca Tungrorum, i.e. the modern city of Tongeren.\nThe population of modern-day Himmerland claims to be the heirs of the ancient Cimbri. The adventures of the Cimbri are described by the Danish Nobel Prize\u2013winning author Johannes V. Jensen, himself born in Himmerland, in the novel \"Cimbrernes Tog\" (1922), included in the epic cycle \"Den lange Rejse\" (English \"The Long Journey\", 1923). The so-called Cimbrian bull (\"Cimbrertyren\"), a sculpture by Anders Bundgaard, was erected on 14 April 1937 in a central town square in Aalborg, the capital of the region of North Jutland.\nA German ethnic minority speaking the Cimbrian language, having settled in the mountains between Vicenza, Verona, and Trento in Italy (also known as Seven Communities), is also called the . For hundreds of years this isolated population and its present 4,400 inhabitants have claimed to be the direct descendants of the Cimbri retreating to this area after the Roman victory over their tribe. However, it is more likely that Bavarians settled here in the Middle Ages. Most linguists remain committed to the hypothesis of a medieval (11th to 12th century AD) immigration to explain the presence of small German-speaking communities in the north of Italy. Some genetic studies seem to prove a Celtic, not Germanic, descent for most inhabitants in the region that is reinforced by Gaulish toponyms such as those ending with the suffix \"-ago\" &lt; Celtic \"-*ako(n)\" (e.g. Asiago is clearly the same place name as the numerous variants \u2013 Azay, Aisy, Az\u00e9, Ezy \u2013 in France, all of which derive from \"*Asiacum\" &lt; Gaulish \"*Asi\u0101ko(n)\"). On the other hand, the original place names in the region, from the specifically localized language known as 'Cimbro' are still in use alongside the more modern names today. These indicate a different origin (e.g., Asiago is known also by its original Cimbro name of \"Sleghe\"). The Cimbrian origin myth was popularized by humanists in the 14th century.\nDespite these connections to southern Germany, belief in a Himmerland origin persisted well into modern times. On one occasion in 1709, for instance, Frederick IV of Denmark paid the region's inhabitants a visit and was greeted as their king. The population, which kept its independence during the time of the Venice Republic, was later severely devastated by World War I. As a result, many Cimbri have left this mountainous region of Italy, effectively forming a worldwide diaspora.\nCulture.\nReligion.\nThe Cimbri are depicted as ferocious warriors who did not fear death. The host was followed by women and children on carts. Aged women, priestesses, dressed in white sacrificed the prisoners of war and sprinkled their blood, the nature of which allowed them to see what was to come.\nStrabo gives this vivid description of the Cimbric folklore:\nIf the Cimbri did in fact come from Jutland, evidence that they practiced ritualistic sacrifice may be found in the Haraldsk\u00e6r Woman discovered in Jutland in the year 1835. Noosemarks and skin piercing were evident and she had been thrown into a bog rather than buried or cremated. Furthermore, the Gundestrup cauldron, found in Himmerland, may be a sacrificial vessel like the one described in Strabo's text. In style, the work looks like Thracian silver work, while many of the engravings are Celtic objects.\nLanguage.\nA major problem in determining whether the Cimbri were speaking a Celtic language or a Germanic language is that, at that time, the Greeks and Romans tended to refer to all groups to the north of their sphere of influence as Gauls, Celts, or Germani rather indiscriminately, and not based upon languages. Caesar seems to be one of the first authors to distinguish the \"Celtae\" and \"Germani\", and he had a political motive for doing so, because it was an argument in favour of his push to set the Rhine as a new Roman border. Yet, one cannot always trust Caesar and Tacitus when they ascribe individuals and tribes to one or the other category, although Caesar made clear distinctions between the two cultures. Some ancient sources categorize the Cimbri as a Germanic tribe, but some ancient authors include the Cimbri among the Celts.\nThere are few direct testimonies to the language of the Cimbri: referring to the Northern Ocean (the Baltic or the North Sea), Pliny the Elder states: \"Philemon says that it is called Morimarusa, i.e. the Dead Sea, by the Cimbri, until the promontory of Rubea, and after that Cronium.\" The contemporary Gaulish terms for \"sea\" and \"dead\" appear to have been \"mori\" and \"*maruo-\"; compare their well-attested modern Insular Celtic cognates \"muir\" and \"marbh\" (Irish), \"m\u00f4r\" and \"marw\" (Welsh), and \"mor\" and \"marv\" (Breton). The same word for \"sea\" is also known from Germanic, but with an \"a\" (*\"mari-\"), whereas a cognate of \"marbh\" is unknown in all dialects of Germanic. Yet, given that Pliny had not heard the word directly from a Cimbric speaker, it cannot be ruled out that the word he heard had been translated into Gaulish.\nThe known Cimbri chiefs have Celtic names, including Boiorix (which may mean \"King of the Boii\" or, more literally, \"King of Strikers\"), Gaesorix (which means \"Spear King\"), and Lugius (which may be named after the Celtic god Lugus). Other evidence to the language of the Cimbri is circumstantial: thus, we are told that the Romans enlisted Gaulish Celts to act as spies in the Cimbri camp before the final showdown with the Roman army in 101 BC.\nJean Markale wrote that the Cimbri were associated with the Helvetii, and more especially with the indisputably Celtic Tigurini. These associations may link to a common ancestry, recalled from two hundred years previous, but that is not certain. Henri Hubert states \"All these names are Celtic, and they cannot be anything else\". Some authors take a different perspective.\nCountering the argument of a Celtic origin is the literary evidence that the Cimbri originally came from northern Jutland, an area with no Celtic placenames, instead only Germanic ones. This does not rule out Cimbric Gallicization during the period when they lived in Gaul. Boiorix, who may have had a Celtic if not a Celticized Germanic name, was king of the Cimbri after they moved away from their ancestral home of northern Jutland. Boiorix and his tribe lived around Celtic peoples during his era as J. B. Rives points out in his introduction to Tacitus' \"Germania\"; furthermore, the name \"Boiorix\" can be seen as having either Proto-Germanic or Celtic roots.\nIn fiction.\nThe science fiction story \"Delenda Est\" by Poul Anderson depicts an alternate history in which Hannibal won the Second Punic War and destroyed Rome, but Carthage proved unable to rule Italy \u2013 which fell into utter chaos. Thus, there was no one to stop the Cimbri two hundred years later. They filled the vacuum, conquered Italy, assimilated the local population to their own culture and by the equivalent of the 20th century had made of Italy a flourishing, technologically advanced kingdom speaking a Germanic language. He also wrote an unrelated historical novel \"The Golden Slave\", about a Cimbrian chieftain who is enslaved by the Romans after the Battle of Vercellae.\nCimbri is referenced in Italo Calvino's novel \"If on a Winter's Night a Traveller\" as a fictional country that warred with a similarly fictionalised version of Cimmeria, thus imposing its own written language onto the Cimmerians.\nJeff Hein's historical fiction series The Cimbrian War tells the story of the Cimbri and their migration across Iron-Age Europe."}
{"id": "6573", "revid": "29", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6573", "title": "Cimbri/Waid", "text": ""}
{"id": "6576", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6576", "title": "Cleveland Browns", "text": "The Cleveland Browns are a professional American football team based in Cleveland. The Browns compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) North division. The team is named after original coach and co-founder Paul Brown. They play their home games at Huntington Bank Field, which opened in 1999, with administrative offices and training facilities in Berea, Ohio. The franchise's official club colors are brown, orange, and white. They are unique among the 32 member clubs of the NFL in that they do not have a logo on their helmets.\nThe franchise was founded in 1944 by Brown and businessman Arthur B. McBride as a charter member of the All-America Football Conference (AAFC), and began play in 1946. The Browns dominated the AAFC, compiling a 47\u20134\u20133 record in the league's four seasons and winning its championship in each. When the AAFC folded after the 1949 season, the Browns joined the NFL along with the San Francisco 49ers and the original Baltimore Colts. The Browns won a championship in their inaugural NFL season, as well as in the 1954, 1955, and 1964 seasons, and in a feat unequaled in any of the North American major professional sports, played in their league championship game in each of their first 10 years of existence, winning seven of those games. From 1965 to 1995, they qualified to play in the NFL playoffs 14 times, but did not win another championship or play in the Super Bowl during that period.\nIn 1995, owner Art Modell, who had purchased the Browns in 1961, announced plans to move the team to Baltimore. After threats of legal action from the city of Cleveland and fans, a compromise was reached in early 1996 that allowed Modell to establish the Baltimore Ravens as a new franchise while retaining the contracts of all Browns personnel. The Browns' intellectual property, including team name, logos, training facility, and history, were kept in trust and the franchise was regarded by the NFL as suspended, guaranteed to return no later than the 1999 season, either by relocation of an existing franchise or an expansion draft. While several of the existing franchises at the time considered relocating to Cleveland, in 1998 it was confirmed that the NFL would hold an expansion draft and field 31 teams when the Browns resumed play in 1999. Although the 1999 Browns were restocked via an expansion draft, the Browns are not considered to be an expansion franchise.\nSince resuming operations in 1999, the Browns have struggled to find success, especially during the 2010s when they did not post one winning season throughout that decade. They have had only four winning seasons (2002, 2007, 2020, and 2023), three playoff appearances (2002, 2020, and 2023), and one playoff win (2020), winning less than one third of their games in total, and in 2017 were only the second team in NFL history to have a 0\u201316 season after the 2008 Detroit Lions. The franchise has also been noted for a lack of stability with head coaches (10 full time - including two who were fired after only one season - and two interim since 1999) and quarterbacks (40 different starters since 1999). From 2003 to 2019, the Browns had a 17-season playoff drought, which ended during the 2020 season. They are one of four teams to have never appeared in a Super Bowl. Their lack of recent success has been as such that their decades-long rivalry with the Pittsburgh Steelers--a rivalry that at one point the Browns had a 22-game lead in the all-time series--saw the Steelers overtake the Browns in the rivalry in 2007 and currently hold a 17-game edge over the Browns.\nHistory.\nThe Cleveland Browns were founded in 1944 when taxicab magnate Arthur B. \"Mickey\" McBride secured a Cleveland franchise in the newly formed All-America Football Conference (AAFC). Paul Brown was the team's namesake and first coach. The Browns began play in 1946 in the AAFC. The Browns won each of the league's four championship games before the league dissolved in 1949. The team then moved to the more established National Football League (NFL), where it continued to dominate. Between 1950 and 1955, Cleveland reached the NFL championship game every year, winning three times.\nMcBride and his partners sold the team to a group of Cleveland businessmen in 1953 for a then-unheard-of $600,000. Eight years later, the team was sold again, this time to a group led by New York advertising executive Art Modell. Modell fired Brown before the 1963 season, but the team continued to win behind fullback Jim Brown. The Browns won the championship in 1964 and reached the title game the following season, losing to the Green Bay Packers.\nWhen the AFL and NFL merged before the 1970 season, Cleveland became part of the new American Football Conference (AFC). While the Browns made it back to the playoffs in 1971 and 1972, they fell into mediocrity through the mid-1970s. A revival of sorts took place in 1979 and 1980, when quarterback Brian Sipe engineered a series of last-minute wins and the Browns came to be called the \"Kardiac Kids\". Under Sipe, however, the Browns did not make it past the first round of the playoffs. Quarterback Bernie Kosar, whom the Browns drafted in 1985, led the team to three AFC Championship games in the late 1980s, but lost each time to the Denver Broncos.\nIn 1995, Modell announced he was relocating the Browns to Baltimore, sowing a mix of outrage and bitterness among Cleveland's dedicated fan base. Negotiations and legal battles led to an agreement where Modell would be allowed to take his personnel to Baltimore as an expansion franchise, called the Baltimore Ravens, but would leave Cleveland the Browns' colors, logos and heritage for a reactivated Browns franchise that would take the field no later than 1999. Prior to the 1991 season, the Browns hired Bill Belichick to be the head coach. He led the team one winning season in his five years with the team, which occurred in 1994. The 1994 team defeated the New England Patriots 20\u201313 in the Wild Card Round before falling to the Pittsburgh Steelers 29\u20139 in the Divisional Round. Following a 5\u201311 season in 1995, the Browns fired Belichick.\nAfter three years of inactivity while Cleveland Stadium was demolished and Huntington Bank Field, then known as Cleveland Browns Stadium was built on its site, the Browns were reactivated and started play again in 1999 under new owner Al Lerner. Under head coach Chris Palmer, the Browns went 2\u201314 in 1999 and 3\u201313 in 2000. The Browns struggled throughout the 2000s and 2010s, posting a record of 101\u2013234\u20131 () since their 1999 return. The Browns have only posted four winning seasons and three playoff appearances (2002, 2020, 2023) since returning to the NFL. The team's struggles have been magnified since 2012, when the Lerner family sold the team to businessman Jimmy Haslam. In six seasons under Haslam's ownership, the Browns went through four head coaches and four general managers, none of whom had found success. \nButch Davis was named head coach prior to the 2001 season. In his first season, he led the team to a 7\u20139 record in 2001. He led the team to a playoff berth with a 9\u20137 record in 2002. The Browns lost 36\u201333 to the Steelers in the Wild Card Round. The team regressed to a 5\u201311 record in the 2003 season. Following a 3\u20138 start to the 2004 season, Davis resigned. Terry Robiskie finished out the season with a 1\u20134 mark. Prior to the 2005 season, the team hired Romeo Crennel to the be their next head coach. He went 6\u201310 in 2005 and 4\u201312 in 2006. He posted a winning 10\u20136 record that did not qualify for the playoffs in the 2007 season. He went 4\u201312 in the 2008 season and was fired following the season. Eric Mangini posted consecutive 5\u201311 seasons as head coach in 2009 and 2010 before getting fired. Pat Shurmur coached the team to a 4\u201312 record in 2011 and a 5\u201311 record in 2012 before getting fired. Rob Chudzinski coached the Browns in the 2013 season. He was fired after a 4\u201312 campaign. Mike Pettine coached the team in 2014 and 2015, going 7\u20139 and 3\u201313 before getting fired. In 2016 and 2017 under head coach Hue Jackson, the Browns went 1\u201331 (, including a winless 0\u201316 season in 2017), the worst two-year stretch in NFL history, and received the number one overall draft pick in both of those years. Those top overall draft picks were used on Myles Garrett and Baker Mayfield.\nPrior to the 2019 season, Freddie Kitchens was hired as head coach. Kitchens led the team to a 6\u201310 record and was fired following the season. Prior to the 2020 season, the Browns hired Kevin Stefanski as their head coach. In 2020, the Browns secured their first playoff berth since 2002 by defeating the Pittsburgh Steelers in week 17 and finishing the season 11\u20135. In the Wild Card Round, they defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers 48\u201337 for their first playoff win since 1994. The Browns saw their season end in a 22\u201317 loss to the Kansas City Chiefs in the Divisional Round. The 2021 season saw the Browns go 8\u20139 and miss the postseason. In the following season, the Browns went 7\u201310 and missed the postseason for the 2022 season. In the 2023 season, the Browns returned to the postseason with a 11\u20136 mark. The Browns ended their season with a 45\u201314 loss to the Texans in the Wild Card Round.\nLogos and uniforms.\nLogos.\nThe Browns are the only National Football League team without a helmet logo. The logoless helmet serves as the Browns' official logo. The organization has used several promotional logos throughout the years; players' numbers were painted on the helmets from 1957 to 1960; and an unused \"CB\" logo was created in 1965. But for much of their history, the Browns' helmets have been an unadorned burnt orange color with a top stripe of dark brown (officially called \"seal brown\") divided by a white stripe.\nThe team has had various promotional logos throughout the years, such as the \"Brownie Elf\" mascot or a Brown \"B\" in a white football. While Art Modell did away with the elf in the mid-1960s (believing it to be too childish), its use has been revived since the team's return in 1999. The popularity of the Dawg Pound section at Huntington Bank Field has led to a brown and orange dog being used for various Browns functions. But overall, the orange, logo-less helmet continues as the primary trademark of the Cleveland Browns. The Browns have used special commemorative logos during individual seasons, such as the 1999 logo to celebrate the team's return to the NFL, a 60th-anniversary logo for the 2006 season, and a 75th-anniversary logo in 2021.\nThe current logos and wordmarks were introduced on February 24, 2015, with the helmet design remaining largely as is, the only differences being minor color changes to the shade of orange used on the helmet and the facemask being changed from gray to brown. A new secondary \"dawg\" logo was introduced in 2023. The logo, featuring a bull mastiff dog, was created by graphic designer Houston Mark and was the winning entry of a fan vote. It features numerous small homages to the city of Cleveland, state of Ohio, and the team's history.\nSince the 2022 season, by virtue of a fan poll, a version of the Brownie elf logo is featured at midfield at Huntington Bank Field.\nUniforms.\nThe original designs of the jerseys, pants, and socks remained mostly the same, but the helmets went through many significant revisions throughout the years. The Browns uniforms saw their first massive change prior to the 2015 season.\nJerseys:\nPants:\nSocks:\nHelmet: Solid white (1946\u20131949); solid white for day games and solid orange for night games (1950\u20131951); orange with a single white stripe (1952\u20131956); orange with a single white stripe and brown numerals on the sides (1957\u20131959); orange with a brown-white-brown stripe sequence and brown numerals on the sides (1960); orange with a brown-white-brown stripe sequence (1961\u20131995 and 1999\u2013present).\nOver the years, the Browns have had on-and-off periods of wearing white for their home games, particularly in the 1970s and 80s, as well as in the early 2000s after the team returned to the league. Until recently, when more NFL teams have started to wear white at home at least once a season, the Browns were the only non-subtropical team north of the Mason-Dixon line to wear white at home on a regular basis.\nSecondary numerals (called \"TV numbers\") first appeared on the jersey sleeves in 1961. Over the years, there have been minor revisions to the sleeve stripes, the first occurring in 1968 (brown jerseys worn in early season) and 1969 (white and brown jerseys) when stripes began to be silkscreened onto the sleeves and separated from each other to prevent color bleeding. However, the basic five-stripe sequence has remained intact (with the exception of the 1984 season). A recent revision was the addition of the initials \"AL\" to honor team owner Al Lerner who died in 2002; this was removed in 2013 upon Jimmy Haslam assuming ownership of the team.\nOrange pants with a brown-white-brown stripe sequence were worn from 1975 to 1983 and become symbolic of the \"Kardiac Kids\" era. The orange pants were worn again occasionally in 2003 and 2004.\nOther than the helmet, the uniform was completely redesigned for the 1984 season. New striping patterns appeared on the white jerseys, brown jerseys and pants. Solid brown socks were worn with brown jerseys and solid orange socks were worn with white jerseys. Brown numerals on the white jerseys were outlined in orange. White numerals on the brown jerseys were double outlined in brown and orange. (Orange numerals double outlined in brown and white appeared briefly on the brown jerseys in one pre-season game.) However, this particular uniform set was not popular with the fans, and in 1985 the uniform was returned to a look similar to the original design. It remained that way until 1995.\nIn 1999, the expansion Browns adopted the traditional design with two exceptions: first, the TV numbers, previously on the sleeves, were moved to the shoulders; and second, the orange-brown-orange pants stripes were significantly widened.\nExperimentation with the uniform design began in 2002. An alternate orange jersey was introduced that season as the NFL encouraged teams to adopt a third jersey, and a major design change was made when solid brown socks appeared for the first time since 1984 and were used with white, brown and orange jerseys. Other than 1984, striped socks (matching the jersey stripes) had been a signature design element in the team's traditional uniform. The white striped socks appeared occasionally with the white jerseys in 2003\u20132005 and 2007.\nExperimentation continued in 2003 and 2004 when the traditional orange-brown-orange stripes on the white pants were replaced by two variations of a brown-orange-brown sequence, one in which the stripes were joined (worn with white jerseys) and the other in which they were separated by white (worn with brown jerseys). The joined sequence was used exclusively with both jerseys in 2005. In 2006, the traditional orange-brown-orange sequence returned.\nAdditionally in 2006, the team reverted to an older uniform style, featuring gray face masks; the original stripe pattern on the brown jersey sleeves (The white jersey has had that sleeve stripe pattern on a consistent basis since the 1985 season.) and the older, darker shade of brown.\nThe Browns wore brown pants for the first time in team history on August 18, 2008, preseason game against the New York Giants. The pants contain no stripes or markings. The team had the brown pants created as an option for their away uniform when they integrated the gray facemask in 2006. They were not worn again until the Browns \"family\" scrimmage on August 9, 2009, with white-striped socks. The Browns have continued to wear the brown pants throughout the 2009 season. Browns quarterback Brady Quinn supported the team's move to wearing the brown pants full-time, claiming that the striped pattern on the white pants \"prohibit[ed] mobility\".\nHowever, the fans generally did not like the brown pants, and after being used for only one season, the team returned to their white shirt-on-white pants in 2010. Coach Eric Mangini told \"The Plain Dealer\" the Browns won't use the brown pants anymore. \"It wasn't very well-received,\" Mangini said. \"I hope we can get to the point where we can wear fruit on our heads and people wouldn't notice.\" At the time, the brown pants weren't officially dropped by the team, but simply not used.\nThe Browns chose to wear white at home for the 2011 season, and wound up wearing white for all 16 games as when they were on the road, the home team would wear their darker colored uniform.\nThe Browns brought back the brown pants in their home game against the Buffalo Bills on October 3, 2013, on \"Thursday Night Football\", pairing them with the brown jerseys. It marked the first time the team wore an all-brown combination in team history.\nOn April 14, 2015, the Cleveland Browns unveiled their new uniform combinations, consisting of the team's colors of orange, brown and white, but with the slight altering of the orange color to a slightly darker, but more vibrant matte orange (noticeable on the helmet, which featured a seal brown facemask), and seal brown and white, with orange numerals which featured a dropshaw (brown on the white road and orange alternate and white on the home brown jerseys). Above the jersey numerals, the word \"CLEVELAND\" appeared emblazoned in brown (orange on the home brown and white on the orange alternate jerseys) in a custom sans-serif font type. \nThe Browns brought back the all-brown look for the NFL Color Rush program in 2016, minus the white elements. In 2018, despite the Color Rush program being discontinued, the uniform was worn at home three times. For the 2019 season, the Browns promoted this uniform to their primary home uniform and donned it for six home games as well as any away game in which the home team wore white. \nThe club unveiled a new uniform design for the 2020 season. The new uniform design pays homage to the Browns' classic uniform design from years past.\nIn 2023, the Browns introduced new \"White Out\" uniforms, an all-white uniform, featuring a white helmet, that will be worn during select home games. This will mark the first time since 1950 the Browns will have non-orange helmets. The white helmets, which will feature an orange stripe down the middle flanked by two brown stripes (basically inverting the regular helmet's colors), are an homage to the early years of the franchise.\nRivalries.\nThe Browns have rivalries with all three of their AFC North opponents. In addition, the team has had historical rivalries with the Denver Broncos, Detroit Lions, San Francisco 49ers, and Houston Oilers/Tennessee Titans.\nDivisional rivalries.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nOften called the \"Turnpike Rivalry\", the Browns' biggest rival has long been the Pittsburgh Steelers. Former Browns owner Art Modell scheduled home games against the Steelers on Saturday nights from 1964 to 1970 to help fuel the rivalry. The rivalry has also been fueled by the proximity of the two teams, number of championships both teams have won, players and personnel having played and/or coached for both sides, and personal bitterness. The teams have played twice annually since 1950, making it the oldest rivalry in the AFC and the fifth-oldest rivalry in the NFL. Though the Browns dominated this rivalry early in the series (winning the first eight meetings and posting a 31\u20139 record in the 1950s and 1960s), the Steelers went 15\u20135 in the 1970s and 36\u20139\u20131 since the Browns returned to the league in 1999. The Steelers have been particularly dominant in Pittsburgh, posting a 44\u20137 record when hosting the Browns since 1970, including to winning streaks of 16 games (1970\u201385) and 17 games (2004\u201320).\nThe Steelers currently hold a 79\u201361\u20131 lead. The Browns and Steelers met in the playoffs in , , and 2020, with the Steelers holding a 2\u20131 lead in the postseason series. Though the rivalry has cooled in Pittsburgh due to the Modell move as well as the Browns' poor play since 1999, the Steelers still remain the top rival for Cleveland.\nCincinnati Bengals.\nOriginally conceived due to the personal animosity between Paul Brown and Art Modell, the \"Battle of Ohio\" between the Browns and the Cincinnati Bengals has been fueled by the sociocultural differences between Cincinnati and Cleveland, a shared history between the two teams, and similar team colors, as Brown used the exact shade of orange for the Bengals that he used for the Browns. (Though this has changed since then, as the Bengals now use a brighter shade of orange.) Modell, in fact, moved the Browns to the AFC after the AFL\u2013NFL merger in order to have a rivalry with the Bengals. The rivalry has also produced two of the eleven highest-scoring games in NFL history. Cincinnati has the all-time edge 52\u201348. While the Bengals have a 28\u201321 edge since the Browns returned to the NFL in 1999, this series has been more competitive than the Browns' series with their other division rivals, and the Browns have won 9 of the last 11 meetings.\nBaltimore Ravens.\nCreated as a result of the Browns' relocation controversy, the rivalry between the Browns and Baltimore Ravens was more directed at Art Modell than the team itself, and is simply considered a divisional game in Baltimore. This matchup is more bitter for Cleveland than the others due to the fact that the draft picks for 1995 to 1998 resulted in the rosters that won the Super Bowl for the Ravens in 2000. Had Modell not moved the team, these teams, drafted by general manager and former Browns tight end Ozzie Newsome, might have given the Browns a title after a 35-year drought. As of the 2023 season, the Ravens lead the overall series 36\u201314. The two teams have not met in the playoffs.\nOther rivalries.\nDetroit Lions.\nThe Browns' rivalry with the Detroit Lions began in the 1950s, when the Browns and Lions played each other in four NFL Championship Games. The Lions won three of those championships, while the Browns won one. This was arguably one of the NFL's best rivalries in the 1950s. Since the NFL-AFL merger of 1970, the teams have met much less frequently with the Browns' move to the AFC. From 2002 to 2014, the two teams played an annual preseason game known as the \"Great Lakes Classic\". As of the 2023 season, the Lions lead the all-time series 19\u20136.\nDenver Broncos.\nThe Browns had a brief rivalry with the Denver Broncos that arose from three AFC Championship Games from 1986 to 1989. In the 1986 AFC Championship, quarterback John Elway led The Drive to secure a tie in the waning moments at Cleveland Municipal Stadium; the Broncos went on to win in 23\u201320 in overtime. One year later, the two teams met again in the 1987 AFC Championship game at Mile High Stadium. Denver took a 21\u20133 lead, but Browns' quarterback Bernie Kosar threw four touchdown passes to tie the game at 31\u201331 halfway through the 4th quarter. After a long drive, John Elway threw a 20-yard touchdown pass to running back Sammy Winder to give Denver a 38\u201331 lead. Cleveland advanced to Denver's 8-yard line with 1:12 left, but Broncos' safety Jeremiah Castille stripped Browns' running back Earnest Byner of the football at the 2-yard line\u2014a play that has been called The Fumble by Browns' fans. The Broncos recovered it, gave Cleveland an intentional safety, and went on to win 38\u201333. The two teams met yet again in the 1989 AFC Championship at Mile High Stadium, which the Broncos easily won by a score of 37\u201321. \nThis short-lived rivalry also featured a controversial 16\u201313 Browns' win at Cleveland Municipal Stadium in the 1989 regular season. The game was decided by a Matt Bahr 48-yard field goal as time expired - a kick that barely cleared the crossbar. Bahr's field goal came after referee Tom Dooley ordered the teams to switch ends of the field midway through the 4th quarter, thanks to rowdy Dawg Pound fans who pelted the Broncos with dog biscuits, eggs and other debris. The switch gave the Browns a small, timely wind advantage to finish the game.\nMore recently, the rivalry has cooled off as the Broncos won 11 straight meetings from 1991 to 2015 before Cleveland broke that streak with a narrow 17\u201316 win in . As of the 2023 season, Denver leads the overall series, 25\u20137.\nSan Francisco 49ers.\nThe most competitive team in the AAFC era for the Browns was the San Francisco 49ers. San Francisco finished second to the Browns in each of the four seasons that the league played. Two of the Browns' four losses in that era were to the 49ers (including a loss that ended the Browns' 29-game unbeaten streak); the rivalry did not last into the NFL years, particularly after the teams were placed in opposite conferences in . The rivalry has turned into a friendly relationship as many 49ers personnel helped the Browns relaunch in 1999, specifically former 49ers president and CEO Carmen Policy and vice president/director of football operations Dwight Clark, who were hired by the expansion Browns in the same roles. In addition, 49ers owners John York and Denise DeBartolo York reside in Youngstown, southeast of Cleveland. Long-time Browns placekicker and fan favorite Phil Dawson and backup quarterback Colt McCoy signed with the 49ers in 2014. As of the 2023 season, the Browns lead the all-time series 20\u201310.\nHouston Oilers/Tennessee Titans.\nThe Browns' rivalry with the Houston Oilers/Tennessee Titans dates back to the Browns and then-Oilers being placed in the AFC Central after the AFL-NFL merger in 1970. As such, the teams played each other twice annually from 1970 until 2002 when divisional realignment placed the Browns in the AFC North and the now-Titans in the AFC South (excluding 1996-98 when the Browns were inactive). The teams have met much less frequently since 2002. The Browns lead the overall series 37\u201332, and the 69 meetings with the Oilers/Titans are the third-most of any Cleveland opponent, trailing only the Steelers and Bengals.\nThe height of this rivalry was during the 1980s. Oilers head coach Jerry Glanville and Marty Schottenheimer shared several bitter exchanges during the decade and the Browns and Oilers had their only playoff meeting in the , in which the Oilers came away with a narrow 24\u201323 victory. There have been a few memorable games in recent years. In , the Browns erased a 28\u20133 deficit to come away with a 29\u201328 win. In a December contest with playoff implications for both teams, the Browns jumped to a 38\u20137 halftime lead, setting a franchise record for points in the first half. However, Tennessee rallied in the second half but came up just short as the Browns hung on for a 41\u201335 win.\nFan base.\nA 2006 study conducted by \"Bizjournal\" determined that Browns fans are the most loyal fans in the NFL. The study, while not scientific, was largely based on fan loyalty during winning and losing seasons, attendance at games, and challenges confronting fans (such as inclement weather or long-term poor performance of their team). The study noted that Browns fans filled 99.8% of the seats at Huntington Bank Field during the last seven seasons, despite a combined record of 36\u201376 over that span.\nDawg Pound.\nPerhaps the most visible Browns fans are those that can be found in the Dawg Pound. Originally the name for the bleacher section located in the open (east) end of old Cleveland Municipal Stadium, the current incarnation is likewise located in the east end of Huntington Bank Field and still features hundreds of orange and brown clad fans sporting various canine-related paraphernalia. The fans adopted that name in 1984 after members of the Browns defense used it to describe the team's defense.\nRetired cornerback Hanford Dixon, who played his entire career for the Browns (1981\u20131989), is credited with naming the Cleveland Browns defense 'The Dawgs' in the mid-1980s. Dixon and teammates Frank Minnifield and Eddie Johnson would bark at each other and to the fans in the bleachers at the Cleveland Stadium to fire them up. It was from Dixon's naming that the \"Dawg Pound\" subsequently took its title. The fans adopted that name in the years after. Due to this nickname, since the team's revival the Browns have used a bulldog as an alternate logo.\nBrowns Backers.\nThe most prominent organization of Browns fans is the \"Browns Backers Worldwide\" (BBW). The organization has approximately 305,000 members and Browns Backers clubs can be found in every major city in the United States, and in a number of military bases throughout the world, with the largest club being in Phoenix, Arizona. In addition, the organization has a sizable foreign presence in places as far away as Egypt, Australia, Japan, Sri Lanka, and McMurdo Station in Antarctica. According to The Official Fan Club of the Cleveland Browns, the two largest international fan clubs are in Alon Shvut, West Bank and Niagara, Canada, with Alon Shvut having 129 members and Niagara having 310.\nFollowing former Browns owner Randy Lerner's acquisition of English soccer club Aston Villa, official Villa outlets started selling Cleveland Browns goods such as jerseys and NFL footballs. This has raised interest in England and strengthened the link between the two sporting clubs. Aston Villa supporters have set up an organization known as the Aston (Villa) Browns Backers of Birmingham. \nPlayers of note.\nPlayers enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nThe Cleveland Browns have the fourth-largest number of players enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame with a total of 17 enshrined players elected based on their performance with the Browns, and nine more players or coaches elected who spent at least one year with the Browns franchise. No Browns players were inducted in the inaugural induction class of 1963. Otto Graham was the first Browns player to be enshrined as a member of the class of 1965, and the most recent Browns player to be included in the Pro Football Hall of Fame is Joe Thomas, who was a member of the class of 2023, who is the first member inducted that played in the 21st century. \nCleveland Browns legends.\nThe Cleveland Browns legends program honors former Browns who made noteworthy contributions to the history of the franchise. In addition to all the Hall of Famers listed above, the Legends list includes:\nRing of Honor.\nBeginning in 2010, the Browns established a Ring of Honor, honoring the greats from the past by having their names displayed around the upper deck of Huntington Bank Field. The inaugural class in the Browns Ring of Honor was unveiled during the home opener on September 19, 2010, and featured the 16 Hall of Famers listed above who went into the Hall of Fame as Browns. In 2018, Joe Thomas was entered into the Ring of Honor with the number 10,363 \u2013 commemorating his NFL record of consecutive snaps played on offense. In 2019, four-time Pro Bowl linebacker Clay Matthews Jr. was entered into the Ring of Honor.\nStatues.\nNumerous Browns players and staff have had statues made in their honor:\nIn and around Huntington Bank Field\nIn and around Cleveland\nMurals.\nBrowns players featured on murals in downtown Cleveland include:\nFirst-round draft picks.\nAs of the 2023 season, the Browns have had the first overall pick in the NFL Draft on five occasions: 1954, 1999, 2000, 2017, and 2018.\nCoaches of note.\nHead coaches.\nThe Browns have had 22 head coaches serve in the capacity.\nMedia.\nRadio\nWKNR (850 AM), WKRK-FM (92.3 FM), and WNCX (98.5 FM) serve as co-flagship stations for the Cleveland Browns Radio Network.\nThe Browns broadcast team includes play-by-play announcer Andrew Siciliano, commentator Nathan Zegura \u2013 who made news when he had to serve an eight-game suspension due to arguing with officials during a game in 2018 when he was sideline reporter, and former NFL player and current WKNR host Je'Rod Cherry, who serves as sideline analyst/reporter. Cherry, WKRK's Ken Carman and Andy Baskin, and Cleveland area native/former NFL player Tyvis Powell host the network pregame show, while WKRK's Jeff Phelps and Powell host the network postgame show. \nDuring the preseason, Zegura moves over to TV, Cherry goes to the booth, and Carman serves as sideline reporter.\nSpanish language broadcasts are heard on their own separate network of stations, with WJMO 1300 AM serving as the flagship, with announcers Rafa Hern\u00e1ndez-Brito and Octavio Sequera.\nTV\nCleveland ABC affiliate WEWS-TV 5 serves as the broadcast TV home of the Browns, airing year-round team programming as well as all non-network preseason games, with the broadcast team of Chris Rose (play-by-play), Nathan Zegura (analyst), and Aditi Kinkhabwala (sidelines). \nHonors\nThe Browns in-house production team won a pair of Lower Great Lakes Emmy Awards in 2005. One was for a primetime special honoring the 1964 NFL Championship team (\"The 1964 Championship Show\") and one was for a commercial spot (\"The Paperboy\").\nReferences in popular culture.\nThe Browns have (either directly or indirectly) been featured in various movies and TV shows over the years. Notable examples include:"}
{"id": "6579", "revid": "1274395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6579", "title": "Carbine", "text": "A carbine ( or ) is a long gun that has a barrel shortened from its original length. Most modern carbines are rifles that are compact versions of a longer rifle or are rifles chambered for less powerful cartridges.\nThe smaller size and lighter weight of carbines make them easier to handle. They are typically issued to high-mobility troops such as special operations soldiers and paratroopers, as well as to mounted, artillery, logistics, or other non-infantry personnel whose roles do not require full-sized rifles, although there is a growing tendency for carbines to be issued to front-line soldiers to offset the increasing weight of other issued equipment. An example of this is the M4 carbine, the standard issue carbine of the United States Armed Forces.\nEtymology.\nThe name comes from its first users \u2014 cavalry troopers called \"carabiniers\", from the French \"carabine\", from Old French \"carabin\" (soldier armed with a musket), whose origin is unclear. One theory connects it to an \"ancient engine of war\" called a \"calabre\"; another connects it to Medieval Latin \"Calabrinus\" 'Calabrian'; yet another, less likely, to \"escarrabin\", gravedigger, from the scarab beetle.\nHistory.\nHand cannon.\nIn 1432, the Joseon dynasty under the reign of Sejong the Great introduced the world's first handgun, the (). The chongtong has a total length of , an inner diameter of , and an outer diameter of . It was held by the \"cheolheumja\" (, \"iron tong-handle\"), which allows a quick change of barrel for the next shot, and fired \"chasejeon\" (; a contemporary type of standardized bolt) with a maximum fatal range of around . Initially, Joseon considered the gun a failure due to its short effective range, but the chongtong quickly saw use after fielding to the frontier provinces starting in June 1437. The chongtong was used by soldiers of different units and civilians, including women and children, as a personal defense weapon. The gun was notably used by \"chetamja\" (, special reconnaissance), whose mission was to infiltrate enemy territory, and by carabiniers carrying multiple guns, who benefited from its compact size.\nCarbine arquebus and musket.\nThe carbine was originally developed for cavalry. The start of early modern warfare about the 16th century had infantry armed with firearms, prompting cavalry to do the same, even though reloading muzzle loading firearms while moving mounted was highly impractical. Some cavalry, such as the German Reiters, added one or more pistols, while other cavalry, such as harquebusiers, tried various shorter, lightened versions of the infantry arquebus weapons \u2013 the first carbines. But these weapons were still difficult to reload while mounted, and the saber often remained main weapon of such cavalry. Dragoons and other mounted infantry that dismounted for battles usually adopted standard infantry firearms, though some favored versions that were less encumbering when riding \u2013 something that could be arranged to hang clear of the rider's elbows and horse's legs.\nWhile more portable, carbines had the general disadvantages of less accuracy and power than the longer guns of the infantry. During Napoleonic warfare, pistol and carbine-armed cavalry generally transitioned into traditional melee cavalry or dragoons. Carbines found increased use outside of standard cavalry and infantry, such as support and artillery troops, who might need to defend themselves from attack but would be hindered by keeping full-sized weapons with them continuously; a common title for many short rifles in the late 19th century was \"artillery carbine\".\nCarbine rifle.\nAs the rifled musket replaced the smoothbore firearms for infantry in the mid 19th century, carbine versions were also developed; this was often developed separately from the infantry rifles and, in many cases, did not even use the same ammunition, which made for supply difficulties.\nA notable weapon developed towards the end of the American Civil War by the Union was the Spencer carbine, one of the first breechloading, repeating weapons. It had a spring-powered, removable tube magazine in the buttstock which held seven rounds and could be reloaded by inserting spare tubes. It was intended to give the cavalry a replacement weapon which could be fired from horseback without the need for awkward reloading after each shot \u2013 although it saw service mostly with dismounted troopers, as was typical of cavalry weapons during that war.\nIn the late 19th century, it became common for a number of nations to make bolt-action rifles in both full-length and carbine versions. One of the most popular and recognizable carbines were the lever-action Winchester carbines, with several versions available firing revolver cartridges. This made it an ideal choice for cowboys and explorers, as well as other inhabitants of the American West, who could carry a revolver and a carbine, both using the same ammunition.\nThe Lee\u2013Enfield cavalry carbine, a shortened version of the standard British Army infantry rifle was introduced in 1896, although it did not become the standard British cavalry weapon until 1903.\nWorld Wars.\nIn late 1918, France developed the Chauchat-Ribeyrolles for tank crews to defend themselves. Developed from the Fusil Automatique Mod\u00e8le 1917, the stock was replaced with a pistol grip, and the barrel is significantly shorter at resulting in an overall length of .\nIn the decades following World War I, the standard battle rifle used by armies around the world had been growing shorter, either by redesign or by the general issue of carbine versions instead of full-length rifles. This move was initiated by the U.S. Model 1903 Springfield, which was originally produced in 1907 with a short barrel, providing a short rifle that was longer than a carbine but shorter than a typical rifle, so it could be issued to all troops without need for separate versions. Other nations followed suit after World War I, when they learned that their traditional long-barreled rifles provided little benefit in the trenches and merely proved a hindrance to the soldiers. Examples include the Russian Model 1891 rifle, originally with an barrel, later shortened to in 1930, and to in 1938, the German Mauser Gewehr 98 rifles went from in 1898 to in 1935 as the \"Karabiner 98k\" (K98k or Kar98k), or \"short carbine\".\nThe barrel lengths in rifles used by the United States did not change between the bolt-action M1903 rifle of World War I and the World War II M1 Garand rifle, because the barrel on the M1903 was still shorter than even the shortened versions of the Model 1891 and Gewehr 98. The U.S. M1 carbine was more of a traditional carbine in that it was significantly shorter and lighter, with a barrel, than the M1 Garand rifle, and that it was intended for rear-area troops who could not be hindered with full-sized rifles but needed something more powerful and accurate than a Model 1911 pistol (although this did not stop soldiers from using them on the front line). Contrary to popular belief, and even what some books claim, in spite of both being designated \"M1\", the M1 carbine was \"not\" a shorter version of the .30-06 M1 Garand, as is typical for most rifles and carbines, but it was a wholly different design, firing a smaller, less-powerful cartridge. The \"M1\" designates each as the first model in the new U.S. designation system, which no longer used the year of introduction but a sequential series of numbers starting at \"1\": the M1 \"carbine\" and M1 \"rifle\".\nThe United Kingdom developed a \"jungle carbine\" version of their Lee\u2013Enfield service rifle, featuring a shorter barrel, flash suppressor, and manufacturing modifications designed to decrease the rifle's weight Officially titled \"Rifle, No. 5 Mk I\", it was introduced in the closing months of World War II, but it did not see widespread service until the Korean War, the Mau Mau Uprising, and the Malayan Emergency as well as the Vietnam War.\nPost World War II.\nA shorter weapon was more convenient when riding in a truck, armored personnel carrier, helicopter, or aircraft, and also when engaged in close-range combat. Based on the combat experience of World War II, the criteria used for selecting infantry weapons began to change. Unlike previous wars, which were often fought mainly from fixed lines and trenches, World War II was a highly mobile war, often fought in cities, forests, or other areas where mobility and visibility were restricted. In addition, improvements in artillery made moving infantry in open areas even less practical than it had been.\nThe majority of enemy contacts were at ranges of less than , and the enemy was exposed to fire for only short periods of time as they moved from cover to cover. Most rounds fired were not aimed at an enemy combatant but instead fired in the enemy's direction to keep them from moving and from firing back. These situations did not require a heavy rifle, firing full-power rifle bullets with long-range accuracy. A less-powerful weapon would still produce casualties at the shorter ranges encountered in actual combat, and the reduced recoil would allow more shots to be fired in the short amount of time an enemy was visible. The lower-powered round would also weigh less, allowing a soldier to carry more ammunition. With no need of a long barrel to fire full-power ammunition, a shorter barrel could be used. A shorter barrel made the weapon weigh less, was easier to handle in tight spaces, and was easier to shoulder quickly to fire a shot at an unexpected target. Full-automatic fire was also considered a desirable feature, allowing the soldier to fire short bursts of three to five rounds, increasing the probability of a hit on a moving target.\nThe Germans had experimented with selective-fire carbines firing rifle cartridges during the early years of World War II. These were determined to be less than ideal, as the recoil of full-power rifle cartridges caused the weapon to be uncontrollable in full-automatic fire. They then developed an intermediate-power cartridge round, which was accomplished by reducing the power and the length of the standard 7.92\u00d757mm Mauser rifle cartridge to create the 7.92\u00d733mm (short) cartridge. A selective-fire weapon was developed to fire this shorter cartridge, eventually resulting in the Sturmgewehr 44, later translated as \"assault rifle\" (also frequently called \"machine carbines\" by Allied intelligence, a quite accurate assessment, in fact). Very shortly after World War II, the USSR adopted a similar weapon, the ubiquitous AK-47, the first model in the famed Kalashnikov-series, which became the standard Soviet infantry weapon and which has been produced and exported in extremely large numbers up through the present day.\nAlthough the United States had developed the M2 carbine, a selective-fire version of the M1 carbine during WW2, the .30 carbine cartridge was closer to a pistol round in power, making it more of a submachine gun than an assault rifle. It was also adopted only in very small numbers and issued to few troops (the semi-automatic M1 carbine was produced in a 10-to-1 ratio to the M2), while the AK47 was produced by the millions and was standard-issue to all Soviet troops, as well as those of many other nations. The U.S. was slow to follow suit, insisting on retaining a full-power, 7.62\u00d751mm NATO rifle, the M14 (although this \"was\" selective fire).\nIn the 1950s, the British developed the .280 British, an intermediate cartridge, and a select-fire bullpup assault rifle to fire it, the EM-2. They pressed for the U.S. to adopt it so it could become a NATO-standard round, but the U.S. insisted on retaining a full-power, .30 caliber round. This forced NATO to adopt the 7.62\u00d751mm NATO round (which in reality is only slightly different ballistically from the .308 Winchester), to maintain commonality. The British eventually adopted the 7.62mm FN FAL, and the U.S. adopted the 7.62mm M14 rifle. These rifles are both what is known as \"battle rifles\" and were a few inches shorter than the standard-issue rifles they replaced ( barrel as opposed to for the M1 Garand), although they were still full-powered rifles, with selective fire capability. These can be compared to the even shorter, less-powerful assault rifle, which might be considered the \"carbine branch of weapons development\", although indeed, there are now carbine variants of many of the assault rifles which had themselves seemed quite small and light when adopted.\nBy the 1960s, after becoming involved in war in Vietnam, the U.S. did an abrupt about-face and decided to standardize on the intermediate 5.56\u00d745mm round (based on the .223 Remington varmint cartridge) fired from the new, lightweight M16 rifle, leaving NATO to hurry and catch up. Many of the NATO countries could not afford to re-equip so soon after the recent 7.62mm standardization, leaving them armed with full-power 7.62mm battle rifles for some decades afterwards, although by this point, the 5.56mm has been adopted by almost all NATO countries and many non-NATO nations as well. This 5.56mm NATO round was even lighter and smaller than the Soviet 7.62\u00d739mm AK-47 cartridge but possessed higher velocity. In U.S. service, the M16 assault rifle replaced the M14 as the standard infantry weapon, although the M14 continued to be used by designated marksmen. Although at , the barrel of the M16 was shorter than that of the M14, it was still designated a \"rifle\" rather than a \"carbine\", and it was still longer than the AK-47, which used a barrel. (The SKS \u2013 an interim, semi-automatic, weapon adopted a few years before the AK-47 was put into service \u2013 was designated a carbine, even though its barrel was significantly longer than the AK series' . This is because of the Kalashnikov's revolutionary nature, which altered the old paradigm. Compared to previous rifles, particularly the Soviets' initial attempts at semi-automatic rifles, such as the SVT-40, the SKS was significantly shorter. The Kalashnikov altered traditional notions and ushered in a change in what was considered a \"rifle\" in military circles.)\nIn 1974, shortly after the introduction of the 5.56mm NATO, the USSR began to issue a new Kalashnikov variant, the AK-74, chambered in the small-bore 5.45\u00d739mm cartridge, which was a standard 7.62\u00d739mm necked down to take a smaller, lighter, faster bullet. It soon became standard issue in Soviet nations, although many of the nations with export Kalashnikovs retained the larger 7.62\u00d739mm round. In 1995, the People's Republic of China adopted a new 5.8\u00d742mm cartridge to match the modern trend in military ammunition, replacing the previous 7.62\u00d739mm and 5.45\u00d739mm round as standard.\nLater, even lighter carbine variants of many of these short-barreled assault rifles came to be adopted as the standard infantry weapon. In much modern tactical thinking, only a certain number of soldiers need to retain longer-range weapons, serving as designated marksmen. The rest can carry lighter, shorter-ranged weapons for close quarters combat and suppressive fire. This is basically a more extreme extension of the idea that brought the original assault rifle. Another factor is that with the increasing weight of technology, sighting systems, ballistic armor, etc., the only way to reduce the burden on the modern soldier was to equip them with a smaller, lighter weapon. Also, modern soldiers rely a great deal on vehicles and helicopters to transport them around the battle area, and a longer weapon can be a serious hindrance to entering and exiting these vehicles. Development of lighter assault rifles continued, matched by developments in even lighter carbines. In spite of the short barrels of the new assault rifles, carbine variants like the 5.45\u00d739mm AKS-74U and Colt Commando were being developed for use when mobility was essential and a submachine gun was not sufficiently powerful. The AKS-74U featured an extremely short barrel which necessitated redesigning and shortening the gas-piston and integrating front sights onto the gas tube; the Colt Commando was a bit longer, at . Neither was adopted as standard issue, although the U.S. did later adopt the somewhat longer M4 carbine, with a barrel.\nModern history.\nContemporary military forces.\nIn 1994, the U.S. had adopted the M4 carbine, a derivative of the M16 family which fired the same 5.56mm cartridge but was lighter and shorter (in overall length and barrel length), resulting in marginally reduced range and power, although offering better mobility and lighter weight to offset the weight of equipment and armor that a modern soldier has to carry.\nIn spite of the benefits of the modern carbine, many armies are experiencing a certain backlash against the universal equipping of soldiers with carbines and lighter rifles in general, and are equipping selected soldiers, usually designated marksmen, with higher-powered rifles. Another problem comes from the loss of muzzle velocity caused by the shorter barrel, which when coupled with the typical small, lightweight bullets, causes effectiveness to be diminished; a 5.56mm gets its lethality from its high velocity, and when fired from the M4 carbine, its power, penetration, and range are diminished. Thus, there has been a move towards adopting a slightly more powerful cartridge tailored for high performance from both long and short barrels. The U.S. has experimented with a new, slightly larger and heavier caliber such as the 6.5mm Grendel or 6.8mm Remington SPC, which are heavier and thus retain more effectiveness at lower muzzle velocities.\nWhile the U.S. Army adopted the M4 carbine in 1994, the U.S. Marine Corps retained their barrel M16A4 rifles long afterwards, citing the increased range and effectiveness over the carbine version; officers were required to carry an M4 carbine rather than an M9 pistol, as Army officers do. Because the Marine Corps emphasizes \"every Marine a rifleman\", the lighter carbine was considered a suitable compromise between a rifle and a pistol. Marines with restricted mobility such as vehicle operators, or a greater need for mobility such as squad leaders, were issued M4 carbines. In 2015, the Marine Corps approved the M4 carbine for standard issue to front-line Marines, replacing the M16A4 rifle. The rifles are issued to support troops while the carbines go to the front-line Marines, in a reversal of the traditional roles of \"rifles for the front line, carbines for the rear\".\nSpecial forces.\nSpecial forces need to perform fast, decisive operations, frequently airborne or boat-mounted. A pistol, though light and quick to operate, is viewed as not having enough power, firepower, or range. A submachine gun has selective fire, but firing a pistol cartridge and having a short barrel and sight radius, it is not accurate or powerful enough at longer ranges. Submachine guns also tend to have poorer armor and cover penetration than rifles and carbines firing rifle ammunition. Consequently, carbines have gained wide acceptance among United States Special Operations Command, United Kingdom Special Forces, and other communities, having relatively light weight, large magazine capacity, selective fire, and much better range and penetration than a submachine gun.\nUsage.\nThe smaller size and relative lighter weight of carbines makes them easier to handle in close-quarter situations such as urban engagements, when deploying from military vehicles, or in any situation where space is confined. The disadvantages of carbines relative to rifles include inferior long-range accuracy and a shorter effective range. These comparisons refer to carbines (short-barreled rifles) of the same power and class as the regular full-sized rifles.\nCompared to submachine guns, carbines have a greater effective range and are capable of penetrating helmets and body armor when used with armor-piercing ammunition. However, submachine guns are still used by military special forces and police SWAT teams for close quarters battle because they are \"a pistol caliber weapon that's easy to control, and less likely to over-penetrate the target.\" Also, carbines are harder to maneuver in tight encounters where superior range and stopping power at distance are not great considerations.\nFiring the same ammunition as standard-issue rifles or pistols gives carbines the advantage of standardization over those personal defense weapons that require proprietary cartridges.\nThe modern usage of the term carbine covers much the same scope as it always had, namely lighter weapons (generally rifles) with barrels up to in length. These weapons can be considered carbines, while rifles with barrels longer than are generally not considered carbines unless specifically named so. Conversely, many rifles have barrels \"shorter\" than 20 inches, yet are not considered carbines. The AK series rifles has an almost universal barrel length of , well within carbine territory, yet has always been considered a rifle, perhaps because it was designed as such and not shortened from a longer weapon. Modern carbines use ammunition ranging from that used in light pistols up to powerful rifle cartridges, with the usual exception of high-velocity magnum cartridges. In the more powerful cartridges, the short barrel of a carbine has significant disadvantages in velocity, and the high residual pressure, and frequently still-burning powder and gases, when the bullet exits the barrel results in substantially greater muzzle blast. Flash suppressors are a common, partial solution to this problem, although even the best flash suppressors are hard put to deal with the excess flash from the still-burning powder leaving the short barrel (and they also add several inches to the length of the barrel, diminishing the purpose of having a short barrel in the first place).\nPistol-caliber carbines.\nThe typical carbine is the pistol-caliber carbine. These first appeared soon after metallic cartridges became common. These were developed as \"companions\" to the popular revolvers of the day, firing the same cartridge but allowing more velocity and accuracy than the revolver. These were carried by cowboys, lawmen, and others in the Old West. The classic combination would be a Winchester lever-action carbine and a Colt Single Action Army revolver in .44-40 or .38-40. During the 20th century, this trend continued with more modern and powerful smokeless revolver cartridges, in the form of Winchester and Marlin lever action carbines chambered in .38 Special/.357 Magnum and .44 Special/.44 Magnum.\nModern equivalents include the Ruger PC carbine, which uses the same magazine as the Ruger pistols of the same caliber, and the (discontinued) Marlin Camp carbine, which, in .45 ACP, used M1911 magazines. The Ruger Model 44 and Ruger Deerfield carbine were both carbines chambered in .44 Magnum. The Beretta Cx4 Storm shares magazines with many Beretta pistols and is designed to be complementary to the Beretta Px4 Storm pistol. The Hi-Point 995TS are popular, economical and reliable alternatives to other pistol caliber carbines in the United States, and their magazines can be used in the Hi-Point C-9 pistol. Another example is the Kel-Tec SUB-2000 series chambered in either 9mm Parabellum or .40 S&amp;W, which can be configured to accept Glock, Beretta, S&amp;W, or SIG pistol magazines. The SUB-2000 also has the somewhat unusual (although not unique) ability to fold in half.\nThe primary advantage of a carbine over a pistol using the same ammunition is controllability. The combination of firing from the shoulder, longer sight-radius, three points of contact (firing hand, support hand, and shoulder), and precision offer a significantly more user-friendly platform. Many carbines have the ability to mount optics, lights and lasers to accessory rails, which make target acquisition and engagement much easier.\nThe longer barrel can offer increased velocity and, with it, greater energy and effective range due to the propellant having more time to burn. However, loss in bullet velocity can happen where the propellant is utilised before the bullet reaches the muzzle, combined with the friction from the barrel on the bullet. As long guns, pistol-caliber carbines may be less legally restricted than handguns in some jurisdictions. Compared to carbines chambered in intermediate or rifle calibers, such as .223 Remington and 7.62\u00d754mmR, pistol-caliber carbines generally experience less of an increase in external ballistic properties as a result of the propellant. The drawback is that one loses the primary benefits of a handgun, i.e. portability and concealability, resulting in a weapon almost the size of, but less accurate than, a long-gun, but not much more powerful than a pistol.\nAlso widely produced are semi-automatic and typically longer-barreled derivatives of select-fire submachine guns, such as the FN PS90, HK USC, KRISS Vector, Thompson carbine, CZ Scorpion S1 carbine, and the Uzi carbine. In order to be sold legally in many countries, the barrel must meet a minimum length ( in the United States). So the original submachine gun is given a legal-length barrel and made into a semi-automatic firearm, transforming it into a carbine. Though less common, pistol-caliber conversions of centerfire rifles like the AR-15 are commercially available.\nLand defence pistol.\nDuring the Apartheid era of South Africa and the Rhodesian Bush War/South African Border War, a semi-automatic-only pistol-calibre carbine based on submachine guns existed for civilian personal protection as \"land defence pistol\"s (LDP). Known examples were the Bell &amp; White 84, BHS Rhogun, Cobra Mk1, GM-16, Kommando LDP, Northwood R-76, Paramax, Sanna 77 and TS III.\nShoulder-stocked handgun.\nSome handguns used to come from the factory with mounting lugs for a shoulder stock, notably including the \"Broomhandle\" Mauser C96, Luger P.08, and Browning Hi-Power. In the case of the first two, the pistol could come with a hollow wooden stock that doubled as a holster.\nCarbine conversion kits are commercially available for many other pistols, including M1911, and most Glocks. These can either be simple shoulder stocks fitted to a pistol or full carbine conversion kits, which are at least long and replace the pistol's barrel with one at least long for compliance with the United States law. In the United States, fitting a shoulder stock to a handgun with a barrel less than long possibly turns said firearm into a short-barreled rifle, which may be in violation of the National Firearms Act; this is currently being adjudicated by the courts.\nLegal issues.\nUnited States.\nUnder the National Firearms Act, firearms with shoulder stocks or originally manufactured as a rifle and barrels less than in length are classified as short-barreled rifles. Short-barreled rifles are restricted similarly to short-barreled shotguns, requiring a $200 tax paid prior to manufacture or transfer \u2013 a process which can take several months. Because of this, firearms with barrels of less than and a shoulder stock are uncommon. A list of firearms not covered by the NFA due to their antique status may be found here or due to their \"Curio and Relic\" status may be found here; these lists includes a number of carbines with barrels less than the minimum legal length and firearms that are \"primarily collector's items and are not likely to be used as weapons and, therefore, are excluded from the provisions of the National Firearms Act.\" Machine guns, as their own class of firearm, are not subject to requirements of other class firearms.\nDistinct from simple shoulder stock kits, full carbine conversion kits are not classified as short-barreled rifles. By replacing the pistol barrel with one at least in length and having an overall length of at least , a carbine converted pistol may be treated as a standard rifle under Title I of the Gun Control Act of 1968 (GCA). However, certain \"Broomhandle\" Mauser C96, Luger, and Browning Hi-Power Curio &amp; Relic pistols with their originally issued stock attached only may retain their pistol classification.\nCarbines without a stock and not originally manufactured as a rifle are not classified as rifles or short barreled rifles. A carbine manufactured under in length without a forward vertical grip will be a pistol and, state law notwithstanding, can be carried concealed without creating an unregistered Any Other Weapon. A nearly identical carbine with an overall length of or greater is simply an unclassified firearm under Title I of the Gun Control Act of 1968, as the Any Other Weapon catch-all only applies to firearms under or that have been concealed. However, a modification intending to fire from the shoulder and bypass the regulation of short-barreled rifles is considered the unlawful possession and manufacture of an unregistered short-barreled rifle.\nIn some historical cases, the term \"machine carbine\" was the official title for submachine guns, such as the British Sten and Australian Owen guns. The semiautomatic-only version of the Sterling submachine gun was also officially called a carbine. The original Sterling semi-auto would be classed a short-barrel rifle under the U.S. National Firearms Act, but fully legal long-barrel versions of the Sterling have been made for the U.S. collector market."}
{"id": "6581", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6581", "title": "Concrete music", "text": ""}
{"id": "6583", "revid": "48866919", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6583", "title": "Chinese cuisine", "text": "Chinese cuisine comprises cuisines originating from China, as well as from Chinese people from other parts of the world. Because of the Chinese diaspora and the historical power of the country, Chinese cuisine has profoundly influenced many other cuisines in Asia and beyond, with modifications made to cater to local palates. Chinese food staples such as rice, soy sauce, noodles, tea, chili oil, and tofu, and utensils such as chopsticks and the wok, can now be found worldwide. \nThe world's earliest eating establishments recognizable as restaurants in the modern sense first emerged in Song dynasty China during the 11th and 12th centuries. Street food became an integral aspect of Chinese food culture during the Tang dynasty, and the street food culture of much of Southeast Asia was established by workers imported from China during the late 19th century. \nThe preferences for seasoning and cooking techniques in Chinese provinces depend on differences in social class, religion, historical background, and ethnic groups. Geographic features including mountains, rivers, forests, and deserts also have a strong effect on the locally available ingredients, considering that the climate of China varies from tropical in the south to subarctic in the northeast. Imperial royal and noble preferences also play a role in the change of Chinese cuisine. Because of imperial expansion, immigration, and trading, ingredients and cooking techniques from other cultures have been integrated into Chinese cuisines over time and Chinese culinary influences have spread worldwide.\nThere are numerous regional, religious, and ethnic styles of Chinese cuisine found within China and abroad. Chinese cuisine is highly diverse and most frequently categorised into provincial divisions, although these province-level classifications consist of many more styles within themselves. During the Qing dynasty, the most praised Four Great Traditions in Chinese cuisine were Chuan, Lu, Yue, and Huaiyang, representing cuisines of West, North, South, and East China, respectively. In 1980, a modern grouping from Chinese journalist Wang Shaoquan's article published in the People's Daily newspaper identified the Eight Cuisines of China as Anhui (), Guangdong (), Fujian (), Hunan (), Jiangsu (), Shandong (), Sichuan (), and Zhejiang ().\nChinese cuisine is deeply intertwined with traditional Chinese medicine, such as in the practise of Chinese food therapy. Color, scent and taste are the three traditional aspects used to describe Chinese food, as well as the meaning, appearance, and nutrition of the food. Cooking should be appraised with respect to the ingredients used, knife work, cooking time, and seasoning.\nHistory.\nPre-Tang dynasty.\nChinese society greatly valued gastronomy, and developed an extensive study of the subject based on its traditional medical beliefs. Chinese culture initially centered around the North China Plain. The first domesticated crops seem to have been the foxtail and broomcorn varieties of millet, while rice was cultivated in the south. By 2000 BC, wheat had arrived from western Asia. These grains were typically served as warm noodle soups instead of baked into bread as in Europe. Nobles hunted various wild game and consumed mutton, pork and dog as these animals were domesticated. Grain was stored against famine and flood and meat was preserved with salt, vinegar, curing, and fermenting. The flavor of the meat was enhanced by cooking it in animal fats though this practice was mostly restricted to the wealthy.\nBy the time of Confucius in the late Zhou, gastronomy had become a high art. Confucius discussed the principles of dining: The L\u00fcshi chunqiu notes: \"Only if one is chosen as the Son of Heaven will the tastiest delicacies be prepared [for him].\"\nThe Zhaohun (4-3rd c. BC) gives some examples: turtle ragout, honey cakes and beer (chilled with ice).\nDuring Shi Huangdi's Qin dynasty, the empire expanded into the south. By the time of the Han dynasty, the different regions and cuisines of China's people were linked by major canals and leading to greater complexity in the different regional cuisines. Not only is food seen as giving \"qi\", energy, but the food is also about maintaining yin and yang. The philosophy behind it was rooted in the \"I Ching\" and Chinese traditional medicine: food was judged for color, aroma, taste, and texture and a good meal was expected to balance the Four Natures ('hot', warm, cool, and 'cold') and the Five Tastes (pungent, sweet, sour, bitter, and salty). Salt was used as a preservative from early times, but in cooking was added in the form of soy sauce, and not at the table.\nBy the Later Han period (2nd century), writers frequently complained of lazy aristocrats who did nothing but sit around all day eating smoked meats and roasts.\nDuring the Han dynasty, the Chinese developed methods of food preservation for military rations during campaigns such as drying meat into jerky and cooking, roasting, and drying grain.\nChinese legends claim that the roasted, flat bread shaobing was brought back from the \"Xiyu\" (the Western Regions, a name for Central Asia) by the Han dynasty General Ban Chao, and that it was originally known as hubing (, lit. \"barbarian bread\"). The shaobing is believed to be descended from the hubing. Shaobing is believed to be related to the Persian \"nan\" and Central Asian \"nan\", as well as the Middle Eastern pita. Foreign westerners made and sold sesame cakes in China during the Tang dynasty.\nDuring the Southern and Northern dynasties non-Han people like the Xianbei of Northern Wei introduced their cuisine to northern China, and these influences continued up to the Tang dynasty, popularizing meat like mutton and dairy products like goat milk, yogurts, and Kumis among even Han people. It was during the Song dynasty that Han Chinese developed an aversion to dairy products and abandoned the dairy foods introduced earlier.\nThe Han Chinese rebel Wang Su who received asylum in the Xianbei Northern Wei after fleeing from Southern Qi, at first could not stand eating dairy products like goat's milk and meat like mutton and had to consume tea and fish instead, but after a few years he was able to eat yogurt and lamb, and the Xianbei Emperor asked him which of the foods of China (Zhongguo) he preferred, fish vs mutton and tea vs yogurt.\nPost-Tang dynasty.\nThe great migration of Chinese people south during the invasions preceding and during the Song dynasty increased the relative importance of southern Chinese staples such as rice and congee. Su Dongpo has improved the red braised pork as Dongpo pork. The dietary and culinary habits also changed greatly during this period, with many ingredients such as soy sauce and Central Asian influenced foods becoming widespread and the creation of important cookbooks such as the \"Shanjia Qinggong\" () and the \"Wushi Zhongkuilu\" () showing the respective esoteric foods and common household cuisine of the time.\nThe Yuan and Qing dynasties introduced Mongolian and Manchu cuisine, warm northern dishes that popularized hot pot cooking. During the Yuan dynasty many Muslim communities emerged in China, who practiced a porkless cuisine now preserved by Hui restaurants throughout the country. Mongolian cuisine specially Mongolian beef, though popular globally, originated outside Mongolia. Mongolian beef was created in Taiwan in the 1950s, inspired by the rise of Mongolian barbecue-style cooking. Mongolian beef is a perfect example of fusion cuisine. Yunnan cuisine is unique in China for its cheeses like Rubing and Rushan cheese made by the Bai people, and its yogurt, the yogurt may have been due to a combination of Mongolian influence during the Yuan dynasty, the Central Asian settlement in Yunnan, and the proximity and influence of India and Tibet on Yunnan.\nAs part of the last leg of the Columbian Exchange, Spanish and Portuguese traders began introducing foods from the New World to China through the port cities of Canton and Macau. Mexican chili peppers became essential ingredients in Sichuan cuisine and calorically dense potatoes and corn became staple foods across the northern plains.\nDuring the Qing dynasty, Chinese gastronomes such as Yuan Mei focused upon the primary goal of extracting the maximum flavour of each ingredient. As noted in his culinary work the \"Suiyuan shidan\", however, the fashions of cuisine at the time were quite varied and in some cases were flamboyantly ostentatious, especially when the display served also a formal ceremonial purpose, as in the case of the Manchu Han Imperial Feast.\nAs the pace of life increases in modern China, fast food like fried noodles, fried rice and \"gaifan\" (dish over rice) become more and more popular.\nRegional cuisines.\nChinese cuisine exhibits an immense amount of regional diversity. A number of different styles contribute to Chinese cuisine but perhaps the best known and most influential are Cantonese cuisine, Shandong cuisine, Jiangsu cuisine (specifically Huaiyang cuisine) and Sichuan cuisine. These styles are distinctive from one another due to factors such as availability of resources, climate, geography, history, cooking techniques and lifestyle. \nOne style may favour the use of garlic and shallots over chili and spices, while another may favour preparing seafood over other meats and fowl. Jiangsu cuisine favours cooking techniques such as braising and stewing, while Sichuan cuisine employs baking. Zhejiang cuisine focuses more on serving fresh food, Fujian cuisine is famous for its seafood and soups and the use of spices, Hunan cuisine is famous for its hot and sour taste, Anhui cuisine incorporates wild ingredients for an unusual taste.\nBased on the raw materials and ingredients used, the method of preparation and cultural differences, a variety of foods with different flavors and textures are prepared in different regions of the country. Many traditional regional cuisines rely on basic methods of preservation such as drying, salting, pickling and fermentation.\nIn addition, the \"rice theory\" attempts to describe cultural differences between north and south China; in the north, noodles are more consumed due to wheat being widely grown whereas in the south, rice is more preferred as it has historically been more cultivated there.\nStaple foods.\nChinese ancestors successfully planted millet, rice, and other grains about 8,000 to 9,000 years ago. Wheat, another staple, took another three or four thousand years. For the first time, grains provided people with a steady supply of food. Because of the lack of various foods, Chinese people had to adapt to new eating habits. Meat was scarce, and so people cooked with small amounts of meat and rice or noodles.\nRice.\nRice was domesticated in the Yangtze River basin in southern China approximately 9,000 years ago and is a primary staple food for people from rice farming areas in southern China. Steamed rice, usually white rice, is the most commonly eaten form. People in South China also like to use rice to make congee as breakfast. Rice is also used to produce beer and vinegar. Glutinous rice (\"sticky rice\") is a variety of rice used in special dishes such as lotus leaf rice and glutinous rice balls.\nWheat.\nIn wheat-farming areas in Northern China, people largely rely on flour-based food, such as noodles, \"bing\" (bread), \"jiaozi\" (a kind of Chinese dumplings), and \"mantou\" (a type of steamed buns). Wheat likely \"appeared in the lower Yellow River around 2600 Before Common Era (BCE), followed by Gansu and Xinjiang around 1900 BCE and finally occurred in the middle Yellow River and Tibet regions by 1600 BCE\".\nNoodles.\nNoodles were invented in China over 4,000 years ago and have since spread across the world. Chinese noodles come dry or fresh in a variety of sizes, shapes and textures and are often served in soups or fried as toppings. Some varieties, such as Shou Mian (\u5bff\u9762, literally noodles of longevity), is an avatar of long life and good health according to Chinese traditions. Noodles can be served hot or cold with different toppings, with broth, and occasionally dry (as is the case with mi-fen). Noodles are commonly made with rice flour or wheat flour, but other flours such as soybean are also used in minor groups. Some noodles names describe their methods of creation, such as the hand-pulled noodle.\nSoybean products.\nTofu is made of soybeans and is another popular food product that supplies protein. The production process of tofu varies from region to region, resulting in different kinds of tofu with a wide range of texture and taste. Other products such as soy milk, soy paste, soy oil, and fermented soy sauce are also important in Chinese cooking.\nThere are many kinds of soybean products, including tofu skin, smoked tofu, dried tofu, and fried tofu.\nStinky tofu is fermented tofu. Like blue cheese or durian, it has a very distinct, potent and strong smell, and is an acquired taste. Hard stinky tofu is often deep-fried and paired with soy sauce or salty spice. Soft stinky tofu is usually used as a spread on steamed buns.\nDoufuru is another type of fermented tofu that has a salty taste. Doufuru can be pickled together with soy beans, red yeast rice or chili to create different color and flavor. This is more of a pickled type of tofu and is not as strongly scented as stinky tofu. Doufuru has the consistency of slightly soft blue cheese, and a taste similar to Japanese miso paste, but less salty. Doufuru can be used as a spread on steamed buns, or paired with rice congee.\nSufu is one other type of fermented tofu that goes through ageing process. The color (red, white, green) and flavor profile can determine the type of sufu it is. This kind of tofu is usually eaten alongside breakfast rice.\nSoybean milk is soybean-based milk. It is a morning beverage, and it has many benefits to human health.\nVegetables.\nApart from vegetables that can be commonly seen, some unique vegetables used in Chinese cuisine include baby corn, bok choy, snow peas, Chinese eggplant, Chinese broccoli, and straw mushrooms. Other vegetables, including bean sprouts, pea vine tips, watercress, lotus roots, chestnuts, water chestnuts, and bamboo shoots, are also used in different cuisines of China.\nBecause of different climate and soil conditions, cultivars of green beans, peas, and mushrooms can be found in rich variety.\nA variety of dried or pickled vegetables are also processed, especially in drier or colder regions where fresh vegetables were hard to get out of season.\nHerbs and seasonings.\nSeasonings such as fresh ginger root, garlic, scallion, cilantro and sesame are widely used in many regional cuisines. Sichuan peppercorns, star anise, cinnamon, fennel, cloves and white peppers and smart weed are also used in different regions.\nTo add extra flavor to the dishes, many Chinese cuisines also contain dried Chinese mushrooms, dried baby shrimp, dried tangerine peel, and dried Sichuan chillies.\nWhen it comes to sauces, China is home to soy sauce, which is made from fermented soybeans and wheat. A number of sauces are also based on fermented soybeans, including hoisin sauce, ground bean sauce and yellow bean sauce. There are also different sauces preferred by regional cuisines, oyster sauce, fish sauce and furu (fermented tofu) are also widely used. Vinegar also has a variety with different flavors: clear rice vinegar, Chinkiang black rice vinegar, Shanxi vinegar, Henghe vinegar etc.\nMeat.\nThe most commonly consumed meat in China is pork. As of at least 2024, China is the second largest beef consuming market in the world. Steakhouses and hot pot restaurants serving beef are becoming increasingly popular in urban China. Chinese consumers particularly value freshly slaughtered beef.\nDesserts and snacks.\nGenerally, seasonal fruits serve as the most common form of dessert consumed after dinner.\nDim sum (\u70b9\u5fc3), originally means a small portion of food, can refer to dessert, or pastries. Later to avoid disambiguation, tian dian (\u751c\u70b9) and gao dian (\u7cd5\u70b9) are used to describe desserts and pastries.\nTraditionally, Chinese desserts are sweet foods and dishes that are served with tea, usually during the meal, or at the end of meals in Chinese cuisine.\nBesides being served as dim sum along with tea, pastries are used for celebration of traditional festivals. The most famous one is moon cake, used to celebrate the Mid-Autumn Festival.\nA wide variety of Chinese desserts are available, mainly including steamed and boiled sweet snacks. Bing is an umbrella term for all breads in Chinese, also including pastries and sweets. These are baked wheat-flour-based confections, with different stuffings including red bean paste, jujube, and a variety of others. Su (\u9165) is another kind of pastry made with more amount of oil, making the confection more friable. Chinese candies and sweets, called \"t\u00e1ng\" (\u7cd6) are usually made with cane sugar, malt sugar, honey, nuts, and fruit. Gao or Guo are rice-based snacks that are typically steamed and may be made from glutinous or normal rice.\nAnother cold dessert is called \"baobing\", which is shaved ice with sweet syrup. Chinese jellies are known collectively in the language as \"ices\". Many jelly desserts are traditionally set with agar and are flavoured with fruits, known as guodong (\u679c\u51bb), though gelatine based jellies are also common in contemporary desserts.\nChinese dessert soups are typically sweet and served hot.\nEuropean pastries are also seen in China, like mille-feuille, cr\u00e8me br\u00fbl\u00e9e, and cheesecake, but they are generally not as popular because the Chinese preference of dessert is mildly sweet and less oily.\nMany types of street foods, which vary from region to region, can be eaten as snacks or light dinner. Prawn crackers are an often-consumed snack in Southeast China.\nDairy products.\nChinese in earlier dynasties evidently drank milk and ate dairy products, although not necessarily from cows, but \"kumis\" (fermented mare's milk) or goat's milk.\nHistorically, many Chinese chefs tried not to use milk, because of the high rate of lactose intolerance among the Chinese population. However, today, dairy products are increasingly used in Chinese cuisine, such as the \"double skin milk\" dessert in Guangdong Province, the Rubing (milk cake) cheese in Yunnan, and yoghurt in Qinghai and Xinjiang. China has a wide variety of dairy desserts that are very popular.\nCold dishes.\nCold dishes are usually served before the main meal. Besides salad and pickles as appetizers, they can range from jelly, beancurd, noodle salad, cooked meat, and sausages to jellyfish or cold soups.\nChinese sausages vary from region to region. The most common sausage is made of pork and pork fat. The flavor is generally salty-sweet in Southern China. In other parts of China, sausages are salted to be preserved. Chinese sausage is prepared in many different ways, including oven-roasting, stir-frying, and steaming.\nSoups.\nIn some part of South China, soups are served between the cold dishes and the main dishes. In other parts of China, soups are served between the main dish and staple foods, before desserts or fruit salad. There are many traditional Chinese soups, such as wonton soup, herbal chicken soup, hot and sour soup, winter melon soup, and so on.\nDrinks.\nTea plays an important role in Chinese dining culture. In China, there are two main types of tea, one is made from dried tea leaves, the other one is made by extracts from tea leaves. Baijiu and huangjiu as strong alcoholic beverages are preferred by many people as well. Wine is not so popular as other drinks in China that are consumed whilst dining, although they are usually available in the menu.\nTea.\nAs well as with dim sum, many Chinese drink their tea with snacks such as nuts, plums, dried fruit (in particular jujube), small sweets, melon seeds, and waxberry. China was the earliest country to cultivate and drink tea, which is enjoyed by people from all social classes. Tea processing began after the Qin and Han dynasties.\nThe different types of Chinese tea include black, white, green, yellow, oolong, and dark tea. Chinese tea is often classified into several different categories according to the variety of the tea plant from which it is sourced, the region in which it is grown, and the method of production used. Some of these types are green tea, oolong tea, black tea, scented tea, white tea, and compressed tea. There are four major tea plantation regions: Jiangbei, Jiangnan, Huanan and the southwestern region. Well known types of green tea include Longjing, Huangshan Maofeng, Bilochun, Putuofeng Cha, and Liu'an Guapian. China is the world's largest exporter of green tea.\nOne of the most ubiquitous accessories in modern China, after a wallet or purse and an umbrella, is a double-walled insulated glass thermos with tea leaves in the top behind a strainer.\nAlcoholic beverages.\nThe importance of \"baijiu\" ( \"white liquor\") in China (99.5% of its alcoholic market) makes it the most-consumed alcoholic spirit in the world. It dates back to the introduction of distilling during the Song dynasty; can be made from wheat, corn, or rice; and is usually around 120 proof (60% ABV). The most ubiquitous brand is the cheap Er guo tou, but Mao Tai is the premium \"baijiu\". Other popular brands include Kang, Lu Zhou Te Qu, and Wu Liang Ye.\n\"Huangjiu\" ( \"yellow liquor\") is not distilled and is a strong rice wine (10\u201315% ABV). Popular brands include Shaoxing Lao Jiu, Shaoxing Hua Diao, and Te Jia Fan.\nWhile fermented grain beverages have been brewed in China for over 9,000 years, it has been long overshadowed by stronger alcohol like Baijiu and Huangjiu.\nHerbal drinks.\nChinese herb tea, also known as \"medicinal herbal tea\", is a kind of tea made from Chinese medicinal herbs.\nOther beverages.\nSoy milk, almond milk, walnut milk and coconut milk are also drunk during the meal in different regions. In some parts of China, hawthorn and jujube juice are preferred. A small shot of fruit vinegar is served as an appetizer in Shanxi.\nOutside China.\nWhere there are historical immigrant Chinese populations, the style of food has evolved and been adapted to local tastes and ingredients, and modified by the local cuisine, to greater or lesser extents. This has resulted in a deep Chinese influence on other national cuisines such as Cambodian cuisine, Filipino cuisine, Singaporean cuisine, Thai cuisine and Vietnamese cuisine. \nChinatowns across the world have been instrumental in shaping the national cuisines of their respective countries, such as the introduction of a street food culture to Thailand in Bangkok Chinatown. There are also a large number of forms of fusion cuisine, often popular in the country in question. Some, such as ramen (Japanese Chinese cuisine), which originated in Yokohama Chinatown, have become popular internationally.\nDeep-fried meat combined with sweet and sour sauce as a cooking style receives an enormous preference outside of China. Therefore, many similar international Chinese cuisines are invented based on sweet and sour sauce, including Sweet and sour chicken (Europe and North America), Manchurian chicken (India) or \"tangsuyuk\" (South Korea).\nApart from the host country, the dishes developed in overseas Chinese cuisines are heavily dependent on the cuisines derived from the origin of the Chinese immigrants. In Korean Chinese cuisine, the dishes derive primarily from Shandong cuisine while Filipino Chinese cuisine is strongly influenced by Fujian cuisine. American Chinese cuisine has distinctive dishes (such as chop suey) originally based on Cantonese cuisine, which are more popular among non-Chinese Americans than with Chinese Americans themselves.\nDining etiquette.\nYouths should not begin eating before their elders do. When eating from a bowl, one should not hold it with its bottom part, because it resembles the act of begging. Chopsticks are the main eating utensils for Chinese food, which can be used to cut and pick up food. When someone is taking a break from eating at the table, they should not put the chopstick into the rice vertically, because it resembles the Chinese traditional funeral tribute, which involves putting chopsticks inside a bowl of rice vertically. It is considered inappropriate to use knives on the dining table. Chopsticks should not be waved around in the air or played with. Food should first be taken from the plate in front. It is considered impolite to stare at a plate. Watching TV, using mobile phones or doing other activities while eating is considered in poor taste. If an older person puts food in a younger person's bowl, the younger person should thank them.\nChinese culture has guidelines in how and when food are eaten. Chinese people typically eat three meals a day, consisting of breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Breakfast is served around 6\u20139am, lunch is served around 12\u20132pm, and dinner is served around 6\u20139pm. A late night, fourth meal of the day is known as siu yeh and served from 9pm-4am, which is similar to the Western concept of supper. Within the Chinese culture, families do follow different traditions. In some families, the elderly members and youngsters get their meal first, then the mother and father, and then the children and teenagers. Other families have the male and female eat separately at different seating area. Whatever tradition the family decide to follow, it is intended to show respect to members of the family.\nRelation to Chinese philosophy and religion.\nFood plays various roles in social and cultural life. In Chinese folk religion, ancestor veneration is conducted by offering food to ancestors and Chinese festivals involve the consumption and preparation of specific foods which have symbolic meanings attached to them. Specific religions in China have their own cuisines such as the Taoist diet, Buddhist cuisine and Chinese Islamic Cuisine. \nThe Kaifeng Jews in Henan province once had their own Chinese Jewish cuisine but the community has largely died out in the modern era and not much is known about the specifics of their cuisine but they did influence foods eaten in their region and some of their dishes remain. Chinese dishes with purported Kaifeng Jewish roots include Kaifeng xiao long bao, Mayuxing bucket-shaped chicken, Chrysanthemum hot pot, and Four Treasures.\nFood also plays a role in daily life. The formality of the meal setting can signify what kind of relationship people have with one another, and the type of food can indicate ones' social status and their country of origin. In a formal setting, up to sixteen of any combination of hot and cold dishes would be served to respect the guests. On the other hand, in a casual setting, people would eat inexpensive meals such as at food stalls or homemade food. The typical disparity in food in the Chinese society between the wealthy and everyone below that group lies in the rarity and cost of the food or ingredient, such as shark fins and bear paws. \nDepending on whether one chooses to have rice or a meal that is made of wheat flour such as bread or noodles as their main source of food, people within a similar culture or of a different background can make an assumption of the other's country of origin from the south or north of China. Different foods have different symbolic meanings. Mooncakes and dumplings are symbolic of the Mid-autumn festival and the Spring Festival, respectively. Pear symbolizes bad luck due to its similarity in pronunciation of 'away' in the native language and noodle means living a long life for its length.\nIn Chinese philosophy, food frequently conveys a message. A Chinese philosophy \"I Ching\" says, \"Gentlemen use eating as a way to attain happiness. They should be aware of what they say, and refrain from eating too much.\""}
{"id": "6585", "revid": "38587278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6585", "title": "Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i", "text": "Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i (; February 19, 1876\u00a0\u2013 March 16, 1957) was a Romanian sculptor, painter, and photographer who made his career in France. Considered one of the most influential sculptors of the 20th century and a pioneer of modernism, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i is called the patriarch of modern sculpture. As a child, he displayed an aptitude for carving wooden farm tools. Formal studies took him first to Bucharest, then to Munich, then to the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts in Paris from 1905 to 1907. His art emphasizes clean geometrical lines that balance forms inherent in his materials with the symbolic allusions of representational art. Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i sought inspiration in non-European cultures as a source of primitive exoticism, as did Paul Gauguin, Pablo Picasso, Andr\u00e9 Derain, and others. However, other influences emerge from Romanian folk art traceable through Byzantine and Dionysian traditions.\nEarly years.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i grew up in the village of Hobi\u021ba, Gorj, near T\u00e2rgu Jiu, close to Romania's Carpathian Mountains, an area known for its rich tradition of folk crafts, particularly woodcarving. Geometric patterns of the region are seen in his later works such as the Endless Column created in 1918.\nHis parents Nicolae and Maria Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i were poor peasants who earned a meagre living through back-breaking labor; from the age of seven, Constantin herded the family's flock of sheep. He showed talent for carving objects out of wood and often ran away from home to escape the bullying of his father and older brothers.\nAt the age of nine, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i left the village to work in the nearest large town. At the age of eleven, he went into the service of a grocer in Slatina; and then he became a domestic in a public house in Craiova, where he remained for several years. When he was 18, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i created a violin by hand with materials he found around his workplace. Impressed by Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's talent for carving, an industrialist enrolled him in the Craiova School of Arts and Crafts (\"\u0219coala de arte \u0219i meserii\"), where he pursued his love for woodworking, graduating with honors in 1898.\nHe then enrolled in the Bucharest School of Fine Arts, where he received academic training in sculpture. He worked hard and quickly distinguished himself as talented. One of his earliest surviving works, under the guidance of his anatomy teacher, Dimitrie Gerota, is a masterfully rendered \u00e9corch\u00e9 (statue of a man with skin removed to reveal the muscles underneath) which was exhibited at the Romanian Athenaeum in 1903. Though just an anatomical study, it foreshadowed the sculptor's later efforts to reveal essence rather than merely copy outward appearance.\nWorking in Paris.\nIn 1903, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i traveled to Munich, and from there to Paris. In Paris, he was welcomed by the community of artists and intellectuals brimming with new ideas. He worked for two years in the workshop of Antonin Merci\u00e9 of the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts and was invited to enter the workshop of Auguste Rodin. Even though he admired the eminent Rodin he left the Rodin studio after only two months, saying, \"Nothing can grow under big trees.\"\nAfter leaving Rodin's workshop, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i began developing the revolutionary style for which he is known. His first commissioned work, \"The Prayer\", was part of a gravestone memorial. It depicts a young woman crossing herself as she kneels, and marks the first step toward abstracted, non-literal representation, and shows his drive to depict \"not the outer form but the idea, the essence of things.\" He also began doing more carving, rather than the method popular with his contemporaries, that of modeling in clay or plaster which would be cast in metal, and by 1908 he worked almost exclusively by carving.\nIn the following few years, he made many versions of \"Sleeping Muse\" and \"The Kiss\", further simplifying forms to geometrical and sparse objects.\nHis works became popular in France, Romania, and the United States. Collectors, notably John Quinn, bought his pieces, and reviewers praised his works. In 1913 Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's work was displayed at both the Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants and the first exhibition in the U.S. of modern art, the Armory Show.\nIn 1920, he developed a notorious reputation with the entry of \"Princess X\" in the Salon. The phallic appearance of this large, gleaming bronze piece scandalized the Salon and, despite Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's explanation that it was simply meant to represent the essence of womanhood, it was removed from the exhibition. \"Princess X\" was revealed to be Princess Marie Bonaparte, direct descendant of the younger brother of Napoleon Bonaparte. The sculpture has been interpreted by some as symbolizing her obsession with the penis and her lifelong quest to achieve vaginal orgasm, with the help of Sigmund Freud.\nAround this time, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i began crafting the bases for his sculptures with much care and originality because he considered them important to the works themselves.\nOne of his major groups of sculptures involved the \"Bird in Space\" \u2014 simple abstract shapes representing a bird in flight. The works are based on his earlier \"M\u0103iastra\" series. In Romanian folklore the M\u0103iastra is a beautiful golden bird who foretells the future and cures the blind. Over the following 20 years, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i made multiple versions of \"Bird in Space\" out of marble or bronze. Athena Tacha Spear's book, \"Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's Birds,\" (CAA monographs XXI, NYU Press, New York, 1969), first sorted out the 36 versions and their development, from the early \"M\u0103iastra\", to the \"Golden Bird\" of the late teens, to the \"Bird in Space\", which emerged in the early 1920s and which Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i developed throughout his life.\nOne of these versions caused a major controversy in 1926 when photographer Edward Steichen purchased it and shipped it to the United States. Customs officers did not accept the \"Bird\" as a work of art and assessed customs duty on its import as an industrial item. After protracted court proceedings, this assessment was overturned, thus confirming the Bird's status as a duty-exempt work of art. The verdict was somewhat influenced by the Judge Justice Waite's personal appreciation of the art calling it 'beautiful', 'symmetrical', and 'ornamental'. The ruling also established the important principle that \"art\" does not have to involve a realistic representation of nature, and that it was legitimate for it to simply represent an abstract concept \u2013 in this case \"flight\".\nHis work became increasingly popular in the U.S, where he visited several times during his life. Worldwide fame in 1933 brought him the commission of building a meditation temple, the Temple of Deliverance, in India for the Maharajah of Indore, Yeshwant Rao Holkar. Holkar had commissioned three \"L'Oiseau dans l'Espace\"\u2014in bronze, black and white marble\u2014previously, but when Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i went to India in 1937 to complete the plans and begin construction, the Mahrajah was away and, supposedly, lost interest in the project which was to be an homage to his wife, the Maharani Margaret Holkar, who had died when he returned. Of the three birds, the bronze one is in the collection of the Norton Simon Museum in Pasadena, California, and the two marble birds are currently in the permanent collection of the National Gallery of Australia in Canberra, Australia.\nIn 1938, he finished the World War I monument in T\u00e2rgu-Jiu where he had spent much of his childhood. \"Table of Silence\", \"The Gate of the Kiss\", and \"Endless Column\" commemorate the courage and sacrifice of Romanians who in 1916 defended T\u00e2rgu Jiu from the forces of the Central Powers. The restoration of this ensemble was spearheaded by the World Monuments Fund and was completed in 2004.\nThe T\u00e2rgu Jiu ensemble marks the apex of his artistic career. In his remaining 19 years he created fewer than 15 pieces, mostly reworking earlier themes, and while his fame grew, he withdrew. Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i received his first retrospective in 1955 at the Guggenheim Museum in New York. In 1955 \"Life\" magazine reported, \"Wearing white pajamas and a yellow gnome-like cap, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i today hobbles about his studio tenderly caring for and communing with the silent host of fish, birds, heads, and endless columns which he created.\"\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i was cared for in his later years by a Romanian refugee couple. He became a French citizen in 1952 in order to make the caregivers his heirs, and to bequeath his studio and its contents to the Mus\u00e9e National d'Art Moderne in Paris. In 2021, for IRCAM and Centre Pompidou's Festival Manifeste, the intermedial large-scale installation \"Infinite Light Columns / Constellations of The Future, tribute to Constantin Brancusi\" by artists duo Arotin &amp; Serghei has been installed on Renzo Piano's IRCAM Tower on Centre Pompidou Square, on the opposite site to Brancusi's Studio.\nPersonal life.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i dressed simply, reflective of his Romanian peasant background. His studio was reminiscent of the houses of the peasants from his native region: there was a big slab of rock as a table and a primitive fireplace, similar to those found in traditional houses in his native Oltenia, while the rest of the furniture was made by him out of wood. Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i would cook his own food, traditional Romanian dishes, with which he would treat his guests.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i held a large spectrum of interests, from science to music, and was known to play the violin. He would sing old Romanian folk songs, often expressing his feelings of homesickness. After the installment of communism, the artist never permanently returned to his native Romania, but did visit eight times.\nHis circle of friends included artists and intellectuals in Paris such as Amedeo Modigliani, Ezra Pound, Henri Pierre Roch\u00e9, Guillaume Apollinaire, Louise Bourgeois, Pablo Picasso, Man Ray, Marcel Duchamp, Henri Rousseau, Peggy Guggenheim, Tristan Tzara, and Fernand L\u00e9ger. He was an old friend of Romany Marie, who was also Romanian, and referred Isamu Noguchi to her caf\u00e9 in Greenwich Village.\nAlthough surrounded by the Parisian avant-garde, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i never lost contact with Romania and had friends from the community of Romanian artists and intellectuals living in Paris, including Benjamin Fondane, George Enescu, Theodor Pallady, Camil Ressu, Nicolae D\u0103r\u0103scu, Panait Istrati, Traian Vuia, Eug\u00e8ne Ionesco, Emil Cioran, Natalia Dumitresco, and Paul Celan. Another Romanian scholar wrote on Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i, Mircea Eliade.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i held a particular interest in mythology, especially Romanian mythology, folk tales, and traditional art (which also had a strong influence on his works), but he became interested in African and Mediterranean art as well.\nA talented handyman, he built his own phonograph and made most of his furniture, utensils, and doorways. His worldview valued \"differentiating the essential from the ephemeral,\" with Plato, Lao-Tzu, and Milarepa as influences. Reportedly, he had a copy of the first ever translation from the Tibetan into French of Jacques Bacot's Le poete tibetain Milarepa: ses crimes, ses \u00e9preuves, son Nirvana that he kept by his bedside. He identified closely with Milarepa's mountain existence since Brancusi himself came from the Carpathian Mountains of Romania and he often thought he was a reincarnation of Milarepa. He was a saint-like idealist and near ascetic, turning his workshop into a place where visitors noted the deep spiritual atmosphere. However, particularly through the 1910s and 1920s, he was known as a pleasure seeker and merrymaker in his bohemian circle. He enjoyed cigarettes, good wine, and the company of women. He had one child, John Moore, with the New Zealand pianist Vera Moore. He never acknowledged his son as his own.\nDeath and legacy.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i died on March 16, 1957, aged 81. He was buried in the Cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse in Paris. This cemetery also displays statues that Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i carved for deceased artists.\nAt his death, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i left 1200 photographs and 215 sculptures. He bequeathed part of his collection to the French state on condition that his workshop be rebuilt as it was on the day he died. This reconstruction of his studio, adjacent to the Pompidou Centre, is open to the public. Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's studio inspired Swedish architect Klas Anshelm's design of the Malm\u00f6 Konsthall, which opened in 1975.\nIn September 1957, African American sculptor Richard Hunt traveled from Chicago to Paris to view Brancusi's studio. Hunt's visit left an enduring impression on the 22-year-old artist, not only because of the artistic influence of Brancusi and exploration of biomorphic abstraction in sculpture but also because of the way which Hunt chose to live the majority of his life. Like Brancusi, Hunt slept in his own studio surrounded by his art and the tools used in his practice for much of his life.\nBrancusi's \"Bird in Space\" sculptures inspired the Modernist poet, Ezra Pound, specifically his late \"Cantos\" which were written in the mid-twentieth century. The literary critic Lucy Jeffery highlights ways in which Brancusi's sculptural form influenced Ezra Pound, analysing Pound's \"Canto CXVII et seq., 815\". Through close textual analysis and with direct reference to Brancusi's comments on his own creative process, Jeffery highlights how Pound's and Brancusi's sculptural process and resulting style is one of ambiguity and tension between: levity and weight, simplicity and complexity, ease and struggle. As Jeffery remarks: 'Despite their drive towards an holistic artwork, neither Brancusi nor Pound could, to borrow [Albert] Boime's phrasing, \"emancipate\" their art from the material or social context to which it belonged.' In the article, Jeffery contextualises Brancusi's work in relation to the sculptor Gaudier-Brzeska, photographer Man Ray, and writers such as Mina Loy, Samuel Beckett, and Peter Russell.\nIn 1962, Georg Olden used Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's \"Bird in Space\" as the inspiration behind his design of the Clio Award statuette.\nIn November 1971, was established in his birth village Hobi\u021ba, as a branch of the .\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i was elected posthumously to the Romanian Academy in 1990.\nGoogle commemorated his 135th birthday with a Doodle in 2011 consisting of seven of his works.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i's works are housed in museums around the world: in Romania at the National Museum of Art and Craiova Art Museum, in the US at the Museum of Modern Art (New York City) and the Philadelphia Museum of Art, the former holding the largest collection of Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i sculptures in the United States.\nConstantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i University in T\u00e2rgu Jiu and a metro station in Bucharest are named after him.\nIn 2015, the Romanian Parliament declared February 19 \"The Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i Day\", a working holiday in Romania.\nDirector Mick Davis plans to make a biographical film about Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i called \"The Sculptor\", and British director Peter Greenaway said in 2017 that he is working on a film called \"Walking to Paris\", a film which shows Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's journey from Bucharest to Paris.\nArt market.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i's piece \"Madame L.R.\" sold for \u20ac29.185 million ($37.2 million) in 2009, setting a record price for a sculpture sold at auction.\nIn May 2018, \"La Jeune Fille Sophistiqu\u00e9e\" (\"Portrait de Nancy Cunard\"), a polished bronze on a carved marble base (1932), sold for US$71 million (with fees) at Christie's New York, setting a world record auction price for the artist.\nSelected works.\nBoth \"Bird in Space\" and \"Sleeping Muse I\" are sculptures of animate objects; however, unlike ones from Ancient Greece or Rome, or those from the High Renaissance period, these works of art are more abstract in style.\n\"Bird in Space\" is a series from the 1920s. One of these, constructed in 1925 using wood, stone, and marble (Richler 178) stands around 72\u00a0inches tall and consists of a narrow feather standing erect on a wooden base. Similar models, but made from materials such as bronze, were also produced by Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i and placed in exhibitions.\n\"Sleeping Muse I\" has different versions as well; one, from 1909 to 1910, is made of marble and measures 6 \u00be in. in height (Adams 549). This is a model of a head, without a body, with markings to show features such as hair, nose, lips, and closed eyes. In \"A History of Western Art\", Adams says that the sculpture has \"an abstract, curvilinear quality and a smooth contour that create an impression of elegance\" (549). The qualities which produce the effect can particularly be seen in the shape of the eyes and in the set of the mouth.\nIn fiction.\nApeirogon by Colum McCann p212"}
{"id": "6586", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6586", "title": "Claus Sluter", "text": "Claus Sluter (1340s in Haarlem \u2013 1405 or 1406 in Dijon) was a Dutch sculptor, living in the Duchy of Burgundy from about 1380. He was the most important northern European sculptor of his age and is considered a pioneer of the \"northern realism\" of the Early Netherlandish painting that came into full flower with the work of Jan van Eyck and others in the next generation.\nLife.\nThe name \"Claes de Slutere van Herlam\" is inscribed in the Register of the Corporation of Stonemasons and Sculptors of Brussels around the years 1379/1380. He then moved to the Burgundian capital of Dijon, where from 1385 to 1389 he was the assistant of Jean de Marville, court sculptor to Philip the Bold, Duke of Burgundy. From 1389 to his death he was court sculptor himself, with the rank of \"valet de chambre\". He was succeeded by his nephew Claus de Werve.\nWork.\nSluter's most significant work is the so-called \"Well of Moses\" (1395\u20131403), or the Great Cross. It was created for the Carthusian monastery of Champmol, which was founded by Philip the Bold right outside Dijon in 1383. For many years, the top portion was thought to have included (along with Christ on a cross), sculptures of the Virgin and John the Evangelist. However it was more likely just Christ, with Mary Magdalene kneeling at the foot of the cross. The cross, and whatever was on the terrace below, was destroyed at some point after 1736 and before 1789, probable because the roof of the building protecting the monument collapsed. Some fragments from the original Cross are preserved in the Mus\u00e9e Arch\u00e9ologique de Dijon. Life-sized figures representing Old Testament prophets and kings (Moses, David, Daniel, Jeremiah, Zachariah, and Isaiah) stand around the base, holding phylacteries and books inscribed with verses from their respective texts, which were interpreted in the Middle Ages as typological prefigurations of the sacrifice of Christ. The work's physical structure, in which the Old Testament figures support those of the New Dispensation, literalizes the typological iconography. The pedestal surmounts a hexagonal fountain. The entire monument is executed in limestone quarried from Tonnerre and Asni\u00e8res.\nThe portal of the former mortuary chapel of Champmol is positioned a few feet away from the Well of Moses. It consists of three sculptural groups by Sluter: a standing Madonna and Child at the trumeau; the duke and St. John, his patron saint, at the left jamb and the duchess and her patron saint, Catherine, at the right one. Sluter was also responsible for the main part of the work on Philip's tomb, which (restored and partly reconstructed) has been moved to the Museum of Fine Arts which is housed in the former ducal palace in Dijon.\nSluter was one of the sculptors of the pleurants, or mourners, which occupy niches below the tombs of Philip the Bold, his wife Margaret, and John the Fearless."}
{"id": "6587", "revid": "73920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6587", "title": "Cadillac, Michigan", "text": "Cadillac ( ) is a city in and county seat of Wexford County in the U.S. state of Michigan. The population was 10,371 at the 2020 census, making it the second most-populated city in the Northern Michigan region, after Traverse City.\nCadillac was settled as early as 1871 and formerly known as the village of Clam Lake before incorporating as a city in 1877. The city is located upon the shores of Lake Cadillac, connected by the Clam Lake Canal to Lake Mitchell. The Clam River, which begins in Cadillac, is part of the Muskegon River watershed. Cadillac is the junction of three major highways: US Highway 131, M-55, and M-115. The geographic center of Michigan is approximately north-northwest of Cadillac. Cadillac is the primary city of the Cadillac micropolitan area, which includes all of Wexford County and Missaukee County to the east, and had population of 48,725 at the 2020 census.\nHistory.\nVillage of Clam Lake.\nEuropean explorers and fur traders visited this area from the 18th century, most of them initially French and French-Canadians who traded with regional Native Americans. More permanent communities were not established until the late 19th century. Initial settlements developed from logging camps and the logging industry.\nIn 1871, the first sawmill began operations at Clam Lake. Originally called the Pioneer Mill, it was built by John R. Yale. That same year, George A. Mitchell, a prominent local banker and railroad entrepreneur, and Adam Gallinger, a local carpenter, formed the Clam Lake Canal Improvement and Construction Company. Two years later, the Clam Lake Canal was constructed between Big and Little Clam lakes, known as present-day Lakes Mitchell and Lake Cadillac. Sawmill owners used the canal to transport timber from Big Clam Lake to the mills and railroad sites on Little Clam Lake. The Grand Rapids and Indiana Railroad (G.R. &amp; I. Railroad) had reached the area in 1872.\nThe settlement of Clam Lake was incorporated as a village in 1874. George Mitchell was elected as the first mayor. The village was incorporated as a city in 1877 and renamed Cadillac, after Antoine Laumet de La Mothe, sieur de Cadillac, a French colonist who started the first permanent settlement at Detroit in 1701.\nBattle of Manton.\nThe Wexford County seat of government, originally located in Sherman, was moved to Manton in 1881, as the result of a compromise between the feuding residents of Cadillac and Sherman. Cadillac partisans, however, won the county seat by a county-wide vote in April 1882. The day following the election, a sheriff's posse left the city for Manton by special train to seize the county records. After they arrived and collected a portion of the materials, however, an angry crowd confronted the Cadillac men and drove them out of town.\nWhen the sheriff returned to Cadillac, he encountered a force consisting of several hundred armed men; this group reportedly included a brass band. The Sheriff's force, some of whom may have been intoxicated, traveled back to Manton to seize the remaining records. Although Manton residents confronted the Cadillac men and barricaded the courthouse, the posse successfully seized the documents. They returned to Cadillac in dubious glory.\nCity of Cadillac.\nIn 1878, Ephraim Shay perfected his Shay locomotive, which was particularly effective in its ability to climb steep grades, maneuver sharp turns, and accommodate imperfections in railroad tracks. Cadillac was home to the Michigan Iron Works Company, which manufactured the Shay locomotive for a short time in the early 1880s. The lumber industry continued to dominate the city, attracting a large immigrant labor force, most of whom were Swedish. (Later, Cadillac made sister city arrangements with M\u00f6lnlycke, Sweden, and Rovaniemi, Finland).\nIn 1899, the Cadillac Club formed, the forerunner of the Cadillac Area Chamber of Commerce.\nBy the early 20th century, with the lumber depleted, the timber industry was in decline. Today, manufacturers employ 30% of residents. Cadillac's range of industries includes the manufacture of pleasure boats, automotive parts, water-well components, vacuum cleaners, and rubber products.\nIn 1936, the U.S. Forest Service and the Civilian Conservation Corps developed the Caberfae Ski Area during the Great Depression as an investment in future economic development. This resulted in promotion of this area as a tourist center. Caberfae remains in operation today, as the oldest ski resort in the midwest. Tourism and outdoor recreation have since become an important sector of Cadillac's economy.\nIn the summer, tourists travel to the city and region for boating, fishing, hiking, mountain biking, and camping. During the fall, hunting and color tours are popular. The winter is possibly the busiest season; the area can be found packed with downhill skiers, cross-country skiers, ice-fishers, snow-shoers and\u2013most of all\u2013snowmobilers. The North American Snowmobile Festival (NASF) is held on frozen Lake Cadillac every winter.\nThirsty's, a gas station on M-55 west of Cadillac, was the home of Samantha or \"Sam The Bear\" from the 1970s through the late 1990s, when Sam died of old age. Sam was the only brown bear in captivity in the US at the time to hibernate naturally. Sam lived in a large cage in front of the gas station and was fed ice cream cones by tourists every summer.\nIn October 1975 the rock group Kiss visited Cadillac and performed at the Cadillac High School gymnasium. They played the concert to honor the Cadillac High School football team. In previous years, the team had compiled a record of sixteen consecutive victories, but the 1974 squad opened the season with two losses. The assistant coach, Jim Neff, an English teacher and rock'n'roll fan, thought to inspire the team by playing Kiss music in the locker room. He also connected the team's game plan, K-I-S-S or \"Keep It Simple Stupid\", with the band. The team went on to win seven straight games and their conference co-championship. After learning of their association with the team's success, the band decided to visit the school and play for the homecoming game.\nGeography.\nTopography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.\nThe Lake Cadillac is entirely within the city limits. The larger, Lake Mitchell is nearby on the west side of the city, with of shoreline within the city's municipal boundary. The lakes were connected by a stream which was replaced in 1873 by the Clam Lake Canal. The canal was featured on Ripley's Believe It or Not in the 1970s due to the phenomenon that in winter the canal freezes before the lakes and then after the lakes freeze, the canal thaws and remains unfrozen for the rest of the winter.\nCadillac is located at the eastern edge of what is now managed as the Manistee National Forest. The surrounding area is heavily wooded, with mixed hardwood and conifer forests. Christmas tree farming has been important to the area agricultural industry. Cadillac was chosen in 1988 to donate the holiday tree installed at the lawn of the U.S. Capitol building in Washington, D.C.\nThe area surrounding Cadillac is primarily rural, and is considered to be part of Northern Michigan. Given the small size of nearby communities, the city is a major commercial and industrial hub of the region.\nCityscape.\nThe commercial center of the city is located on the eastern edge of Lake Cadillac. Most downtown buildings range from two to five stories in height. Many face Mitchell Street, the city's tree-lined main street and traditional corridor of travel through town. The downtown contains a movie theater, gift shops, restaurants, a bookstore, specialty food stores, jewelers, clothing retailers, and various other businesses.\nThe Courthouse Hill Historic District, recognized in April 2005, lies adjacent to the city's commercial center. The District contains a number of large Victorian-style residences built by the lumber barons and businessmen who helped develop the city in the 1870s. Population and building density is highest in this area.\nOn the western bank of Lake Cadillac, where M-55 intersects M-115, is what is locally referred to as Cadillac West. This is a small commercial district, bordering Mitchell State Park and the two lakes; it caters mostly to tourists. It contains a number of motels and restaurants.\nAlong the northern and southern stretches of the lake are the main residential areas of the city. They are generally of low to moderate density, characterized primarily by single-family structures.\nClimate.\nCadillac experiences a typical northern Michigan climate, undergoing temperate seasonal changes, influenced by the presence of Lake Michigan and the inevitable lake effect. Winters are generally cold with large amounts of snowfall. Summers are warm. The average high temperature in July is and the average low in January is . Summer temperatures can exceed , and winter temperatures can drop below . Average annual rainfall is , and average annual snowfall is . Snowfall typically occurs between the months of November and March. According to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system, Cadillac has a humid continental climate, abbreviated \"Dfb\" on climate maps.\nSuperfund sites.\nCadillac has two superfund sites, according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. One is located at 1100 Wright Street, the former site of Kysor Industrial Corp, which operations resulted in toxic wastes. The other is located at 1002 6th Street, the former site of Northernaire Plating. Its operations also produced hazardous wastes, which produced contamination.\nDemographics.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 10,355 people, 4,280 households, and 2,625 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 4,927 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 95.6% White, 0.5% African American, 0.6% Native American, 1.0% Asian, 0.4% from other races, and 1.8% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.8% of the population.\nThere were 4,280 households, of which 32.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 39.2% were married couples living together, 16.4% had a female householder with no husband present, 5.7% had a male householder with no wife present, and 38.7% were non-families. 32.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.34 and the average family size was 2.90.\nThe median age in the city was 36.5 years. 24.7% of residents were under the age of 18; 10% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 24.4% were from 25 to 44; 23.8% were from 45 to 64; and 17.1% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 47.4% male and 52.6% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 10,000 people, 4,118 households, and 2,577 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 4,466 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 96.55% White, 0.21% Black or African American, 0.92% Native American, 0.63% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.28% from other races, and 1.38% from two or more races. 1.18% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 4,118 households, out of which 32.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.9% were married couples living together, 14.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.4% were non-families. 31.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.96.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 26.2% under the age of 18, 9.6% from 18 to 24, 27.9% from 25 to 44, 19.6% from 45 to 64, and 16.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.4 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $29,899, and the median income for a family was $36,825. Males had a median income of $29,773 versus $21,283 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,801. About 10.9% of families and 13.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.4% of those under age 18 and 13.3% of those age 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nManufacturing has been the greatest employer in Cadillac since the logging industry. More than 26% of the city's labor force is employed in manufacturing. Three industrial parks are located within the city limits, comprising 7% of the total land use in Cadillac. Their operations generate 47% of the city's tax base. Much of the city's economic performance is determined by the fortunes of local industry.\nThe center of the city is generally perceived to have a \"small-town-feel\". In the summer, the downtown fills with tourists, many from southern Michigan. The city center is one block from Lake Cadillac. For visitors by boat who dock at the public docks, it is nearly as accessible by boat as it is by car. The city's immediate proximity to two lakes, as well as Manistee National Forest, Pere Marquette State Forest, Mitchell State Park and a number of major highways, has established tourism as a significant sector of the local economy.\nDuring the winter months, Lake Cadillac and Lake Mitchell freeze over and the city becomes covered with snow. Cadillac is connected to a number of trail systems popular with winter recreation enthusiasts. The city integrates unusually well into the corridors of travel created by snowmobilers.\nCadillac is also known as Chestnut Town, USA. The local area has a relatively high number of American chestnut trees, planted by pioneers from New York and Pennsylvania who settled in western Michigan. A blight in the early 20th century killed nearly every American Chestnut tree, but those in western Michigan had developed a mysterious resistance and survived.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the city's 2019 \"Comprehensive Annual Financial Report\", the principal employers in the city were:\nArts and culture.\nSites in Cadillac with Michigan historical markers include: Cadillac Carnegie Library, Charles T. Mitchell House, Clam Lake Canal, Cobbs and Mitchell Building, Cobbs and Mitchell No. 1, and the Shay Locomotive.\nGovernment.\nCadillac was incorporated as a city in 1877. It is a home rule city with a Council-Manager form of government-one.\nCurrent council members are Shari Spoelman, Antoinette Schippers, Arthur Stevens, James Dean and Carla Filkins (mayor). The present City Manager is Marcus Peccia.\nCadillac is located in Michigan's 2nd congressional district, represented by Republican John Moolenaar.\nEducation.\nCadillac's public education system has a total of 10 schools, with approximately 3,100 students and 166 teachers with a student:teacher ratio of 19.1:1. Cadillac has 4 private primary and secondary schools with approximately 394 students, 20 teachers and a student:teacher ratio of 20:1.\nCadillac Area Public Schools.\nPublic education is administered by Cadillac Area Public Schools. The city has two high schools: Cadillac High School and Innovation High School. The area also has a middle school, Mackinaw Trail Middle School, covering grades 6, 7 and 8. There are three elementary schools, Forest View Elementary, Franklin Elementary, and Lincoln Elementary. There is one early childhood center, Viking Learning Center. Cadillac also has an alternative high school.\nPrivate schools.\nCadillac Heritage Christian offers nondenominational Christian education from pre-K through 12th grade.\nNorthview Adventist School has 16 students in grades 1\u201310 as of 2020.\nSt. Ann School is a coed private Roman Catholic school with 236 students in grades pre-K through 7.\nTraining schools.\nNorthwoods Aviation, located at Wexford County Airport, offers training programs for piloting and servicing aircraft.\nThe Cadillac Institute of Cosmetology is a full service teaching salon in downtown Cadillac that offers training for general cosmetologists and specialized technicians to high school students through a partnership with Wexford-Missaukee Intermediate School District.\nColleges.\nThe Baker College-Cadillac campus occupies just outside the City of Cadillac. The school has an enrollment of more than 1,300 students and offers Associate's and bachelor's degrees, in addition to professional certifications.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nMajor highways.\nCadillac is situated as the confluence of three highways: US\u00a0131, M-55 and M-115. Prior to 2001, the northern end of the freeway portion of US\u00a0131 was located at the southern entrance to Cadillac. With the construction of a bypass, the US\u00a0131 freeway was extended around the east side of the city. The former route of the highway through downtown Cadillac was redesignated as BUS US\u00a0131. In the city, BUS US\u00a0131 is named Mitchell Street, after George Mitchell, but may be referred to as main street.\nRail.\nThe city is serviced by rail via the Great Lakes Central Railroad. This is primarily a freight line, although passenger service is expected in the future.\nNon-motorized transportation.\nThe White Pine Trail's northern terminus is in Cadillac. The trail, which stretches and originates from Comstock Park, follows an abandoned railroad bed into the center of the city. The trail is paved from the village of Leroy 16 miles north to Cadillac."}
{"id": "6589", "revid": "3519991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6589", "title": "COINTELPRO", "text": "COINTELPRO (a syllabic abbreviation derived from Counter Intelligence Program) was a series of covert and illegal projects conducted between 1956 and 1971 by the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) aimed at surveilling, infiltrating, discrediting, and disrupting American political organizations that the FBI perceived as subversive. Groups and individuals targeted by the FBI included feminist organizations, the Communist Party USA, anti-Vietnam War organizers, activists in the civil rights and Black power movements (e.g., Martin Luther King Jr., the Nation of Islam, and the Black Panther Party), environmentalist and animal rights organizations, the American Indian Movement (AIM), Chicano and Mexican-American groups like the Brown Berets and the United Farm Workers, and independence movements (including Puerto Rican independence groups, such as the Young Lords and the Puerto Rican Socialist Party). Although the program primarily focused on organizations that were part of the broader New Left, they also targeted white supremacist groups, such as the Ku Klux Klan and the National States' Rights Party.\nThe FBI has used covert operations against domestic political groups since its inception; however, covert operations under the official COINTELPRO label took place between 1956 and 1971. However, the official chronology of the program is the subject of the debate. According to a senate investigation, \"If COINTELPRO had been a short-lived aberration, the thorny problems of motivation, techniques, and control presented might be safely relegated to history. However, COINTELPRO existed for years on an 'ad hoc basis before the formal programs were instituted, and more significantly, COINTELPRO-type activities may continue today under the rubric of 'investigation.\" Many of the tactics used in COINTELPRO are alleged to have seen continued use, including discrediting targets through psychological warfare; smearing individuals and groups using forged documents and by planting false reports in the media; harassment; wrongful imprisonment; illegal violence; and assassination. According to a Senate report, the FBI's motivation was \"protecting national security, preventing violence, and maintaining the existing social and political order\".\nBeginning in 1969, leaders of the Black Panther Party were targeted by the COINTELPRO and \"neutralized\" by being assassinated, imprisoned, publicly humiliated or falsely charged with crimes. Some of the Black Panthers targeted include Fred Hampton, Mark Clark, Zayd Shakur, Geronimo Pratt, Mumia Abu-Jamal, and Marshall Conway. Common tactics used by COINTELPRO were perjury, witness harassment, witness intimidation, and withholding of exculpatory evidence.\nFBI Director J. Edgar Hoover issued directives governing COINTELPRO, ordering FBI agents to \"expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize\" the activities of these movements and especially their leaders. Under Hoover, the official in charge of COINTELPRO was assistant director William C. Sullivan. Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy personally authorized some of the programs, giving written approval for limited wiretapping of Martin Luther King's phones \"on a trial basis, for a month or so\". Hoover extended the clearance so his men were \"unshackled\" to look for evidence in any areas of King's life they deemed worthy.\nHistory.\nThe FBI initiated COINTELPRO, an abbreviation for Counterintelligence Program, in 1956 with the aim of undermining the operations of the Communist Party of the United States. In the 1960s, the scope of the organization was broadened to encompass various additional domestic factions, including the Ku Klux Klan, the Socialist Workers Party, and the Black Panther Party. The cessation of all COINTELPRO operations occurred in 1971. Despite its relatively small scale (constituting approximately 0.2% of the FBI's overall workload during a 15-year timeframe), COINTELPRO was subsequently subject to criticism from both Congress and the American public for infringing upon first amendment rights and other grounds.\nTactics included anonymous phone calls, Internal Revenue Service (IRS) audits, and the creation of documents that would divide the American communist organization internally. An October 1956 memo from Hoover reclassified the FBI's ongoing surveillance of black leaders, including it within COINTELPRO, with the justification that the movement was infiltrated by communists. In 1956, Hoover sent an open letter denouncing Dr.\u00a0T.\u00a0R.\u00a0M. Howard, a civil rights leader, surgeon, and wealthy entrepreneur in Mississippi who had criticized FBI inaction in solving recent murders of George W. Lee, Emmett Till, and other African Americans in the South. When the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), an African-American civil rights organization, was founded in 1957, the FBI began to monitor and target the group almost immediately, focusing particularly on Bayard Rustin, Stanley Levison, and eventually Martin Luther King Jr.\nAfter the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, Hoover singled out King as a major target for COINTELPRO. Under pressure from Hoover to focus on King, Sullivan wrote:\nSoon after, the FBI was systematically bugging King's home and his hotel rooms, as they were now aware that King was growing in stature daily as the most prominent leader of the civil rights movement.\nIn the mid-1960s, King began to publicly criticize the Bureau for giving insufficient attention to the use of terrorism by white supremacists. Hoover responded by publicly calling King the most \"notorious liar\" in the United States. In his 1991 memoir, \"Washington Post\" journalist Carl Rowan asserted that the FBI had sent at least one anonymous letter to King encouraging him to commit suicide. Historian Taylor Branch documents an anonymous \"suicide package\" sent by the FBI on November 21, 1964, that contained audio recordings obtained through tapping King's phone and placing bugs throughout various hotel rooms over the past two years, and that was created two days after the announcement of King's impending Nobel Peace Prize. The tape, which was prepared by FBI audio technician John Matter, documented a series of sexual indiscretions by King combined with a letter telling him: \"There is only one way out for you. You better take it before your filthy, abnormal, fraudulent self is bared to the nation\". King believed that he was subsequently informed that the audio would be released to the media if he did not acquiesce and commit suicide prior to accepting his Nobel Peace Prize. When King refused to satisfy their coercion tactics, FBI Associate Director, Cartha D. DeLoach, commenced a media campaign offering the surveillance transcript to various news organizations, including \"Newsweek\" and \"Newsday\". Even by 1969, as has been noted elsewhere, \"[FBI] efforts to 'expose' Martin Luther King Jr. had not slackened even though King had been dead for a year. [The Bureau] furnished ammunition to opponents that enabled attacks on King's memory, and ... tried to block efforts to honor the slain leader.\" However, more portions of the FBI letter to King were made public in 2014 which suggested that the FBI's intent was to push King out of leadership and have \"older leaders\" like Roy Wilkins lead the civil right movement. The claim that the FBI's intent was to remove King from SCLC leadership was also previously backed in 1976 by the findings of the Church Committee.\nDuring the same period the program also targeted Malcolm X. While an FBI spokesman has denied that the FBI was \"directly\" involved in Malcolm's murder in 1965, it is documented that the Bureau worked to \"widen the rift\" between Malcolm and Elijah Muhammad through infiltration and the \"sparking of acrimonious debates within the organization\", rumor-mongering, and other tactics designed to foster internal disputes, which ultimately led to Malcolm's assassination. The FBI heavily infiltrated Malcolm's Organization of Afro-American Unity in the final months of his life. The Pulitzer Prize-winning asserts that most of the men who plotted Malcolm's assassination were never apprehended and that the full extent of the FBI's involvement in his death cannot be known.\nAmidst the urban unrest of July\u2013August 1967, the FBI began \"COINTELPRO\u2013BLACK HATE\", which focused on King and the SCLC, as well as the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), the Revolutionary Action Movement (RAM), the Deacons for Defense and Justice, Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), and the Nation of Islam. BLACK HATE established the Ghetto Informant Program and instructed 23 FBI offices to \"disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize the activities of black nationalist hate type organizations\".\nA March 1968 memo stated the program's goal was to \"prevent the coalition of militant black nationalist groups\"; to \"Prevent the RISE OF A 'MESSIAH' who could unify\u00a0... the militant black nationalist movement\"; \"to pinpoint potential troublemakers and neutralize them before they exercise their potential for violence [against authorities]\"; to \"Prevent militant black nationalist groups and leaders from gaining RESPECTABILITY, by discrediting them to\u00a0... both the responsible community and to liberals who have vestiges of sympathy\"; and to \"prevent the long-range GROWTH of militant black organizations, especially among youth\". Dr. King was said to have potential to be the \"messiah\" figure, should he abandon nonviolence and integrationism, and Kwame Ture was noted to have \"the necessary charisma to be a real threat in this way\" as he was portrayed as someone who espoused a much more militant vision of \"black power\". While the FBI was particularly concerned with leaders and organizers, they did not limit their scope of target to the heads of organizations. Individuals, e.g. writers, were also listed among the targets of operations.\nThis program coincided with a broader federal effort to prepare military responses for urban riots and began increased collaboration between the FBI, Central Intelligence Agency, National Security Agency, and the Department of Defense. The CIA launched its own domestic espionage project in 1967 called Operation CHAOS. A particular target was the Poor People's Campaign, a national effort organized by King and the SCLC to occupy Washington, DC. The FBI monitored and disrupted the campaign on a national level, while using targeted smear tactics locally to undermine support for the march. The Black Panther Party was another targeted organization, wherein the FBI collaborated to destroy the party from the inside out.\nOverall, COINTELPRO encompassed disruption and sabotage of the Socialist Workers Party (1961), the Ku Klux Klan (1964), the Nation of Islam, the Black Panther Party (1967), and the entire New Left social/political movement, which included antiwar, community, and religious groups (1968). A later investigation by the Senate's Church Committee (see below) stated that \"COINTELPRO began in 1956, in part because of frustration with Supreme Court rulings limiting the Government's power to proceed overtly against dissident groups.\" Official congressional committees and several court cases have concluded that COINTELPRO operations against communist and socialist groups exceeded statutory limits on FBI activity and violated constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech and association.\nProgram revealed.\nThe program was secret until March 8, 1971, when the Citizens' Commission to Investigate the FBI burgled an FBI field office in Media, Pennsylvania, took several dossiers, and exposed the program by passing this material to news agencies. The boxing match known as the Fight of the Century between Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier in March 1971 provided cover for the activist group to successfully pull off the burglary. Muhammad Ali was a COINTELPRO target because he had joined the Nation of Islam and the anti-war movement.\nMany news organizations initially refused to immediately publish the information, with the notable exception of \"The Washington Post\". After affirming the reliability of the documents, it published them on the front page (in defiance of the Attorney General's request), prompting other organizations to follow suit. Within the year, Director J. Edgar Hoover declared that the centralized COINTELPRO was over, and that all future counterintelligence operations would be handled case by case.\nAdditional documents were revealed in the course of separate lawsuits filed against the FBI by NBC correspondent Carl Stern, the Socialist Workers Party, and a number of other groups. In 1976 the Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities of the United States Senate, commonly referred to as the \"Church Committee\" after its chairman, Senator Frank Church (D-Idaho), launched a major investigation of the FBI and COINTELPRO. Many released documents have been partly or entirely redacted.\nThe Final Report of the Select Committee castigated the conduct of the intelligence community in its domestic operations (including COINTELPRO) in no uncertain terms:\nThe Church Committee documented a history of the FBI (initially called BOI until 1936) exercising political repression as far back as World War I, and through the 1920s, when agents were charged with rounding up \"anarchists, communists, socialists, reformists and revolutionaries\" for deportation. From 1936 through 1976, the domestic operations were increased against political and anti-war groups.\nFBI claimed intent of COINTELPRO.\nThe FBI claimed that the purpose behind COINTELPRO was to \"expose, disrupt, misdirect, or otherwise neutralize\" groups that the FBI officials believed were \"subversive\" by instructing FBI field operatives to:\nRange of targets.\nAt its inception, the program's main target was the Communist Party.\nIn an interview with the BBC's Andrew Marr in February 1996, Noam Chomsky\u2014a political activist and MIT professor of linguistics\u2014spoke about the purpose and the targets of COINTELPRO, saying:\nAccording to the Church Committee:\nExamples of surveillance, spanning all presidents from FDR to Nixon, both legal and illegal, contained in the Church Committee report:\nGroups that were known to be targets of COINTELPRO operations include:\nThe COINTELPRO operators targeted multiple groups at once and encouraged splintering of these groups from within. In letter-writing campaigns (wherein false letters were sent on behalf of members of parties), the FBI ensured that groups would not unite in their causes. For instance, they launched a campaign specifically to alienate the Black Panther Party from the Mau Maus, Young Lords, Young Patriots and SDS. These racially diverse groups had been building alliances, in part due to charismatic leaders, such as Fred Hampton and his attempts to create a \"Rainbow Coalition\". The FBI was concerned with ensuring that groups could not gain traction through unity, specifically across racial lines. One of the main ways of targeting these groups was to arouse suspicion between the different parties and causes. In this way the bureau took on a divide-and-conquer offensive.\nThe COINTELPRO documents show numerous cases of the FBI's intentions to prevent and disrupt protests against the Vietnam War. Many techniques were used to accomplish this task. \"These included promoting splits among antiwar forces, encouraging red-baiting of socialists, and pushing violent confrontations as an alternative to massive, peaceful demonstrations.\" One 1966 COINTELPRO operation tried to redirect the Socialist Workers Party from their pledge of support for the antiwar movement.\nThe FBI has said that it no longer undertakes COINTELPRO or COINTELPRO-like operations. However, critics have claimed that agency programs in the spirit of COINTELPRO-targeted groups, such as the Committee in Solidarity with the People of El Salvador, the American Indian Movement, Earth First!, and the anti-globalization movement.\nMethods.\nAccording to attorney Brian Glick in his book \"War at Home\", the FBI used five main methods during COINTELPRO:\nThe FBI specifically developed tactics intended to heighten tension and hostility between various factions in the black power movement, for example between the Black Panthers and the US Organization. For instance, the FBI sent a fake letter to the US Organization exposing a supposed Black Panther plot to murder the head of the US Organization, Ron Karenga. They then intensified this by spreading falsely attributed cartoons in the black communities pitting the Black Panther Party against the US Organization. This resulted in numerous deaths, among which were San Diego Black Panther Party members John Huggins, Bunchy Carter and Sylvester Bell. Another example of the FBI's anonymous letter writing campaign is how they turned the Blackstone Rangers head, Jeff Fort, against former ally Fred Hampton, by stating that Hampton had a hit on Fort. They also were instrumental in developing the rift between Black Panther Party leaders Eldridge Cleaver and Huey Newton, as executed through false letters inciting the two leaders of the Black Panther Party.\nDhoruba Bin Wahad, a former Black Panther, reflects on how these tactics made him feel, saying he had a combat mentality and felt like he was at war with the government. When asked about why he thinks the Black Panthers were targeted he said, \"In the United States, the equivalent of the military was the local police. During the early sixties, at the height of the civil rights movement, and the human rights movement, the police in the United States became increasingly militaristic. They began to train out of military bases in the United States. The Law Enforcement Assistance Act supplied local police with military technology, everything from assault rifles to army personnel carriers. In his opinion, the Counterintelligence Program went hand-in-hand with the militarization of the police in the Black community, with the militarization of police in America.\"\nThe FBI also conspired with the police departments of many U.S. cities (San Diego, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Oakland, Philadelphia, Chicago) to encourage repeated raids on Black Panther homes\u2014often with little or no evidence of violations of federal, state, or local laws\u2014which resulted in the police killing many members of the Black Panther Party, most notably Chicago Black Panther Party Chairman Fred Hampton on December 4, 1969. Whether or not the FBI sanctioned his killing remains unproven. Before the death of Hampton, long-term infiltrator, William O'Neal, shared floor plans of his apartment with the COINTELPRO team. He then gave Hampton a dose of secobarbital that rendered Hampton unconscious during the raid on his home.\nIn order to eliminate black militant leaders whom they considered dangerous, the FBI is believed to have worked with local police departments to target specific individuals, accuse them of crimes they did not commit, suppress exculpatory evidence and falsely incarcerate them. Elmer \"Geronimo\" Pratt, a Black Panther Party leader, was incarcerated for 27 years before a California Superior Court vacated his murder conviction, ultimately freeing him. Appearing before the court, an FBI agent testified that he believed Pratt had been framed, because both the FBI and the Los Angeles Police Department knew he had not been in the area at the time the murder occurred.\nSome sources claim that the FBI conducted more than 200 \"black bag jobs\", which were warrantless surreptitious entries, against the targeted groups and their members.\nIn 1969 the FBI special agent in San Francisco wrote Hoover that his investigation of the Black Panther Party had concluded that in his city, at least, the Panthers were primarily engaged in feeding breakfast to children. Hoover fired back a memo implying the agent's career goals would be directly affected by his supplying evidence to support Hoover's view that the Black Panther Party was \"a violence-prone organization seeking to overthrow the Government by revolutionary means\".\nHoover supported using false claims to attack his political enemies. In one memo he wrote: \"Purpose of counterintelligence action is to disrupt the Black Panther Party and it is immaterial whether facts exist to substantiate the charge.\"\nIn one particularly controversial 1965 incident, white civil rights worker Viola Liuzzo was murdered by Ku Klux Klansmen, who gave chase and fired shots into her car after noticing that her passenger was a young black man; one of the Klansmen was Gary Thomas Rowe, an acknowledged FBI informant. The FBI spread rumors that Liuzzo was a member of the Communist Party and had abandoned her children to have sexual relationships with African Americans involved in the civil rights movement. FBI records show that J. Edgar Hoover personally communicated these insinuations to President Johnson. Despite this, three Klansmen would be convicted in a federal trial for Liuzzo's murder in December 1965.\nFBI informant Rowe has also been implicated in some of the most violent crimes of the 1960s civil rights era, including attacks on the Freedom Riders and the 1963 Birmingham, Alabama 16th Street Baptist Church bombing.\nThe ACLU has claimed the FBI supported an extreme right-wing group of former Minutemen, transforming it into a group called the Secret Army Organization that targeted groups, activists, and leaders involved in the Anti-War Movement, using both intimidation and violent acts.\nHoover ordered preemptive action \"to pinpoint potential troublemakers and neutralize them before they exercise their potential for violence.\"\nIllegal surveillance.\nThe final report of the Church Committee concluded:\nToo many people have been spied upon by too many Government agencies and too much information has been illegally collected. The Government has often undertaken the secret surveillance of citizens on the basis of their political beliefs, even when those beliefs posed no threat of violence or illegal acts on behalf of a hostile foreign power. The Government, operating primarily through secret and biased informants, but also using other intrusive techniques, such as wiretaps, microphone \"bugs\", surreptitious mail opening, and break-ins, has swept in vast amounts of information about the personal lives, views, and associations of American citizens. Investigations of groups deemed potentially dangerous\u2014and even of groups suspected of associating with potentially dangerous organizations\u2014have continued for decades, despite the fact that those groups did not engage in unlawful activity.\nGroups and individuals have been assaulted, repressed, harassed and disrupted because of their political views, social beliefs and their lifestyles. Investigations have been based upon vague standards whose breadth made excessive collection inevitable. Unsavory, harmful and vicious tactics have been employed\u2014including anonymous attempts to break up marriages, disrupt meetings, ostracize persons from their professions, and provoke target groups into rivalries that might result in deaths. Intelligence agencies have served the political and personal objectives of presidents and other high officials. While the agencies often committed excesses in response to pressure from high officials in the Executive branch and Congress, they also occasionally initiated improper activities and then concealed them from officials whom they had a duty to inform.\nGovernmental officials\u2014including those whose principal duty is to enforce the law\u2014have violated or ignored the law over long periods of time and have advocated and defended their right to break the law.\nThe Constitutional system of checks and balances has not adequately controlled intelligence activities. Until recently the Executive branch has neither delineated the scope of permissible activities nor established procedures for supervising intelligence agencies. Congress has failed to exercise sufficient oversight, seldom questioning the use to which its appropriations were being put. Most domestic intelligence issues have not reached the courts, and in those cases when they have reached the courts, the judiciary has been reluctant to grapple with them.\nLater similar operations.\nWhile COINTELPRO was officially terminated in April 1971, domestic espionage continued. Between 1972 and 1974, it is documented that the Bureau planted over 500 bugs without a warrant and opened over 2,000 pieces of personal mail. More recent targets of covert action include the American Indian Movement (AIM), Earth First!, and Committees in Solidarity with the People of El Salvador. Documents released under the FOIA show that the FBI tracked the late David Halberstam\u2014a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and author\u2014for more than two decades. \"Counterterrorism\" guidelines implemented during the Reagan administration have been described as allowing a return to COINTELPRO tactics. Some radical groups accuse factional opponents of being FBI informants or assume the FBI is infiltrating the movement. COINTELPRO survivor Filiberto Ojeda Rios was killed by the FBI's hostage rescue team in 2005, his death described by a United Nations special committee as an assassination.\nEnvironmentalist Eric McDavid, convicted on arson charges, was released after documents emerged demonstrating that the FBI informant in his Earth Liberation Front group provided crucial leadership, information, and material without which the crime could not have been committed, repeating the same pattern of behavior of COINTELPRO. It has been claimed these sorts of practices have become widespread in FBI \"counter-terrorism\" cases targeting Muslims in the 2009 Bronx terrorism plot and others.\nAuthors, such as Ward Churchill, Rex Weyler, and Peter Matthiessen allege that the federal government intended to acquire uranium deposits on the Lakota tribe's reservation land, and that this motivated a larger government conspiracy against AIM activists on the Pine Ridge reservation. Others believe COINTELPRO continues and similar actions are being taken against activist groups. Caroline Woidat says that, with respect to Native Americans, COINTELPRO should be understood within a historical context in which \"Native Americans have been viewed and have viewed the world themselves through the lens of conspiracy theory.\" Other authors argue that while some conspiracy theories related to COINTELPRO are unfounded, the issue of ongoing government surveillance and repression is real.\nFBI Agent Richard G. Held is known to have increased FBI support for the Guardians of the Oglala Nation (GOON) squads, who were a private paramilitary group established in 1972 by the elected tribal chairman, Dick Wilson, under authority of the Oglala Sioux. AIM accused GOONs of involvement in 300 assaults and 64 homicides of political opponents. Despite this, The Bureau rarely investigated them and instead used its resources overwhelmingly to prosecute AIM. In 2000, the FBI released a report regarding these alleged unsolved violent deaths on Pine Ridge reservation and accounted for most of the deaths and disputed the claims of unsolved murders. The report stated that only four deaths were unsolved and that some deaths were not murders.\nA lawsuit filed by Dhoruba bin-Wahad, a former member of the Black Panther Party, revealed the existence of multiple programs similar to COINTELPRO including \"Newkill\" (New York Police Killings), Chesrob (a program focused on Panther Assata Shakur), and PRISACTS (The Prison Activists Surveillance Program), a program that focused on \"neutralizing\" political activists who were already in prison, many of whom (like bin-Wahad) had been targeted by COINTELPRO.\nIn April 2018, the \"Atlanta Black Star\" characterized the FBI as still engaging in COINTELPRO behavior by surveilling the Black Lives Matter movement. Internal documents dated as late as 2017 showed that the FBI had surveilled the movement. In 2014, the FBI tracked a Black Lives Matter activist using surveillance tactics which \"The Intercept\" found \"reminiscent of a rich American history of targeting black Americans,\" including COINTELPRO. This practice, along with the imprisonment of black activists for their views, has been associated with the new FBI designation of \"Black Identity Extremists\".\nDefending Rights &amp; Dissent, a civil liberties group, cataloged known instances of First Amendment abuses and political surveillance by the FBI since 2010. The organization found that the FBI devoted disproportionate resources to spy on peaceful left-leaning civil society groups, including Occupy Wall Street, economic justice advocates, racial justice movements, environmentalists, Abolish ICE, and various anti-war movements.\nIn December 2012, the FBI released redacted documents in response to a Freedom of Information Act request from the Partnership for Civil Justice Fund (PCJF). Mara Verheyden-Hilliard, the executive director of PCJF, said the documents showed that FBI counterterrorism agents had monitored the Occupy movement from its inception in August 2011 and that the FBI acted improperly by collecting \"information on people's free-speech actions\" and entering it into \"unregulated databases, a vast storehouse of information widely disseminated to a range of law-enforcement and, apparently, private entities\" (see Domestic Security Alliance Council). The FBI also communicated with the New York Stock Exchange, banks, private businesses and state and local police forces about the movement. In 2014, the PCJF obtained an additional 4,000 pages of unclassified documents through a Freedom of Information Act request, showing \"details of the scrutiny of the Occupy protests in 2011 and 2012 by law enforcement officers, federal officials, security contractors and others.\"\nIn October 2020, Katie Reiter, chief of staff to Michigan state Senator Rosemary Bayer, had an FBI task force come to her house and aggressively question her about a draft bill she had recently discussed which would have limited the use of tear gas against protesters. Reiter had discussed the proposed ban on tear gas on a private 90-minute Zoom call with Bayer and a handful of other staffers. Reiter says the two officers refused to answer any questions about how they became aware of her private meeting. \"The Intercept\" reported about the incident: \"Reiter said that the FBI's visit left her confused and fearful. 'It has impacted my sleep, it has caused me quite a bit of anxiety,' she said. 'And it has certainly impacted how we talk. I try not to let it, I'll just be like, 'No, we're going to talk about this.' But it's in my mind all the time.'\" A spokesperson for the FBI declined to comment on the record, as did a spokesperson for Zoom."}
{"id": "6590", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6590", "title": "Cruise missile", "text": "A cruise missile is an unmanned self-propelled guided missile that sustains flight through aerodynamic lift for most of its flight path. Cruise missiles are designed to deliver a large payload over long distances with high precision. Modern cruise missiles are capable of traveling at high subsonic, supersonic, or hypersonic speeds, are self-navigating, and are able to fly on a non-ballistic, extremely low-altitude trajectory.\nHistory.\nThe idea of an \"aerial torpedo\" was shown in the British 1909 film \"The Airship Destroyer\" in which flying torpedoes controlled wirelessly are used to bring down airships bombing London.\nIn 1916, the American aviator Lawrence Sperry built and patented an \"aerial torpedo\", the Hewitt-Sperry Automatic Airplane, a small biplane carrying a TNT charge, a Sperry autopilot and barometric altitude control. Inspired by the experiments, the United States Army developed a similar flying bomb called the Kettering Bug. Germany had also flown trials with remote-controlled aerial gliders \"(Torpedogleiter)\" built by Siemens-Schuckert beginning in 1916.\nIn the Interwar Period, Britain's Royal Aircraft Establishment developed the Larynx (Long Range Gun with Lynx Engine), which underwent a few flight tests in the 1920s.\nIn the Soviet Union, Sergei Korolev headed the GIRD-06 cruise missile project from 1932 to 1939, which used a rocket-powered boost-glide bomb design. The 06/III (RP-216) and 06/IV (RP-212) contained gyroscopic guidance systems. The vehicle was designed to boost to altitude and glide a distance of , but test flights in 1934 and 1936 only reached an altitude of .\nIn 1944, during World War II, Germany deployed the first operational cruise missiles. The V-1, often called a flying bomb, contained a gyroscope guidance system and was propelled by a simple pulsejet engine, the sound of which gave it the nickname of \"buzz bomb\" or \"doodlebug\". Accuracy was sufficient only for use against very large targets (the general area of a city), while the range of was significantly lower than that of a bomber carrying the same payload. The main advantages were speed (although not sufficient to outperform contemporary propeller-driven interceptors) and expendability. The production cost of a V-1 was only a small fraction of that of a V-2 supersonic ballistic missile with a similar-sized warhead. Unlike the V-2, the initial deployments of the V-1 required stationary launch ramps which were susceptible to bombardment. Nazi Germany, in 1943, also developed the Mistel composite aircraft program, which can be seen as a rudimentary air-launched cruise missile, where a piloted fighter-type aircraft was mounted atop an unpiloted bomber-sized aircraft that was packed with explosives to be released while approaching the target. Bomber-launched variants of the V-1 saw limited operational service near the end of the war, with the pioneering V-1's design reverse-engineered by the Americans as the Republic-Ford JB-2 cruise missile.\nImmediately after World War II, the United States Air Force had 21 different guided missile projects, including proposed cruise missiles. By 1948, all but four of these projects had been canceled: the Air Materiel Command Banshee, the SM-62 Snark, the SM-64 Navaho, and the MGM-1 Matador. The Banshee design was similar to Operation Aphrodite; like Aphrodite, it failed, and was canceled in April 1949. Concurrently, the US Navy's Operation Bumblebee, was conducted at Topsail Island, North Carolina, from c. 1 June 1946, to 28 July 1948. Bumblebee produced proof-of-concept technologies that influenced the US military's other missile projects.\nDuring the Cold War, both the United States and the Soviet Union experimented further with the concept, of deploying early cruise missiles from land, submarines, and aircraft. The main outcome of the United States Navy submarine missile project was the SSM-N-8 Regulus missile, based upon the V-1 but powered by an Allison J33 jet engine. The Regulus entered service but was phased out with the advent of submarine launched ballistic missiles that did not require the submarine to surface in order to launch the missile and guide it to its target.\nThe United States Air Force's first operational surface-to-surface missile was the winged, mobile, nuclear-capable MGM-1 Matador, also similar in concept to the V-1. Deployment overseas began in 1954, first to West Germany and later to the Republic of China and South Korea. On 7 November 1956, the U.S. Air Force deployed Matador units in West Germany, whose missiles were capable of striking targets in the Warsaw Pact, from their fixed day-to-day sites to unannounced dispersed launch locations. This alert was in response to the crisis posed by the Soviet attack on Hungary which suppressed the Hungarian Revolution of 1956.\nBetween 1957 and 1961 the United States followed an ambitious and well-funded program to develop a nuclear-powered cruise missile, Supersonic Low Altitude Missile (SLAM). It was designed to fly below the enemy's radar at speeds above Mach 3 and carry hydrogen bombs that it would drop along its path over enemy territory. Although the concept was proven sound and the engine finished a successful test run in 1961, no airworthy device was ever completed. The project was finally abandoned in favor of ICBM development.\nWhile ballistic missiles were the preferred weapons for land targets, heavy nuclear and conventional weapon tipped cruise missiles were seen by the USSR as a primary weapon to destroy United States naval carrier battle groups. Large submarines (for example, Echo and Oscar classes) were developed to carry these weapons and shadow United States battle groups at sea, and large bombers (for example, Backfire, Bear, and Blackjack models) were equipped with the weapons in their air-launched cruise missile (ALCM) configuration.\nCategories.\nCruise missiles can be categorized by payload/warhead size, speed, range, and launch platform. Often variants of the same missile are produced for different launch platforms (for instance, air- and submarine-launched versions).\nGuidance systems can vary across missiles. Some missiles can be fitted with any of a variety of navigation systems (Inertial navigation, TERCOM, or satellite navigation). Larger cruise missiles can carry either a conventional or a nuclear warhead, while smaller ones carry only conventional warheads.\nHypersonic.\nA hypersonic cruise missile travels at least five times the speed of sound (Mach 5).\nSupersonic.\nThese missiles travel faster than the speed of sound, usually using ramjet engines. The range is typically 100\u2013500\u00a0km, but can be greater. Guidance systems vary.\nExamples:\nLong-range subsonic.\nThe United States, Russia, North Korea, India, Iran, South Korea, Israel, France, China and Pakistan have developed several long-range subsonic cruise missiles. These missiles have a range of over and fly at about . They typically have a launch weight of about and can carry either a conventional or a nuclear warhead. Earlier versions of these missiles used inertial navigation; later versions use much more accurate TERCOM and DSMAC systems. Most recent versions can use satellite navigation.\nExamples:\nMedium-range subsonic.\nThese missiles are about the same size and weight and fly at similar speeds to the above category. Guidance systems vary.\nExamples:\nShort-range subsonic.\nThese are subsonic missiles that weigh around and have a range of up to .\nExamples:\nDeployment.\nThe most common mission for cruise missiles is to attack relatively high-value targets such as ships, command bunkers, bridges and dams. Modern guidance systems permit accurate attacks.\n, the BGM-109 Tomahawk missile model has become a significant part of the United States naval arsenal. It gives ships and submarines a somewhat accurate, long-range, conventional land attack weapon. Each costs about US$1.99 million. Both the Tomahawk and the AGM-86 were used extensively during Operation Desert Storm. On 7 April 2017, during the Syrian Civil War, U.S. warships fired more than 50 cruise missiles into a Syrian airbase in retaliation for a Syrian chemical weapons attack against a rebel stronghold.\nThe United States Air Force (USAF) deploys an air-launched cruise missile, the AGM-86 ALCM. The Boeing B-52 Stratofortress is the exclusive delivery vehicle for the AGM-86 and AGM-129 ACM. Both missile types are configurable for either conventional or nuclear warheads.\nThe USAF adopted the AGM-86 for its bomber fleet while AGM-109 was adapted to launch from trucks and ships and adopted by the USAF and Navy. The truck-launched versions, and also the Pershing II and SS-20 Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles, were later destroyed under the bilateral INF (Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces) treaty with the USSR.\nThe British Royal Navy (RN) also operates cruise missiles, specifically the U.S.-made Tomahawk, used by the RN's nuclear submarine fleet. UK conventional warhead versions were first fired in combat by the RN in 1999, during the Kosovo War (the United States fired cruise missiles in 1991). The Royal Air Force uses the Storm Shadow cruise missile on its Typhoon and previously its Tornado GR4 aircraft. It is also used by France, where it is known as SCALP EG, and carried by the Arm\u00e9e de l'Air's Mirage 2000 and Rafale aircraft.\nIndia and Russia have jointly developed the supersonic cruise missile BrahMos. There are three versions of the Brahmos: ship/land-launched, air-launched, and sub-launched. The ship/land-launched version was operational as of late 2007. The Brahmos have the capability to attack targets on land. Russia also continues to operate other cruise missiles: the SS-N-12 Sandbox, SS-N-19 Shipwreck, SS-N-22 Sunburn and SS-N-25 Switchblade. Germany and Spain operate the Taurus missile while Pakistan has made the Babur missile Both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China (Taiwan) have designed several cruise missile variants, such as the well-known C-802, some of which are capable of carrying biological, chemical, nuclear, and conventional warheads.\nNuclear warhead versions.\nChina.\nChina has the CJ-10 land attack cruise missile which is capable of carrying a nuclear warhead. Additionally, China appears to have tested a hypersonic cruise missile in August 2021, a claim it denies.\nFrance.\nThe French Force de Frappe nuclear forces include both land and sea-based bombers with Air-Sol Moyenne Port\u00e9e (ASMP) high-speed medium-range nuclear cruise missiles. Two models are in use, ASMP and a newer ASMP-Amelior\u00e9 (ASMP-A), which was developed in 1999. An estimated 40 to 50 were produced.\nIndia.\nIndia in 2017 successfully flight-tested its indigenous Nirbhay ('Fearless') land-attack cruise missile, which can deliver nuclear warheads to a strike range of 1,000\u00a0km. Nirbhay had been flight-tested successfully.\nIndia currently operates 7 variants of Brahmos cruise missile operational range of 300-1000 km.\nIndia is currently developing hypersonic BrahMos-II which is going to be the fastest cruise missile.\nIsrael.\nThe Israel Defense Forces reportedly deploy the medium-range air-launched Popeye Turbo ALCM and the Popeye Turbo SLCM medium-long range cruise missile with nuclear warheads on Dolphin class submarines.\nPakistan.\nPakistan currently has four cruise missile systems: the air-launched Ra'ad-I and its enhanced version Ra'ad-II; the ground and submarine launched Babur; ship-launched Harbah missile and surface launched Zarb missile. Both, Ra'ad and Babur, can carry nuclear warheads between 10 and 25 kt, and deliver them to targets at a range of up to and respectively. Babur has been in service with the Pakistan Army since 2010, and Pakistan Navy since 2018.\nRussia.\nRussia has Kh-55SM cruise missiles, with a range similar to the United States' AGM-129 range of 3000\u00a0km, but are able to carry a more powerful warhead of 200\u00a0kt. They are equipped with a TERCOM system which allows them to cruise at an altitude lower than 110 meters at subsonic speeds while obtaining a CEP accuracy of 15 meters with an inertial navigation system. They are air-launched from either Tupolev Tu-95s, Tupolev Tu-22Ms, or Tupolev Tu-160s, each able to carry 16 for the Tu-95, 12 for the Tu-160, and 4 for the Tu-22M. A stealth version of the missile, the Kh-101 is in development. It has similar qualities as the Kh-55, except that its range has been extended to 5,000\u00a0km, is equipped with a 1,000\u00a0kg conventional warhead, and has stealth features which reduce its probability of intercept.\nAfter the collapse of the Soviet Union, the most recent cruise missile developed was the Kalibr missile which entered production in the early 1990s and was officially inducted into the Russian arsenal in 1994. However, it only saw its combat debut on 7 October 2015, in Syria as a part of the Russian military campaign in Syria. The missile has been used 14 more times in combat operations in Syria since its debut.\nIn the late 1950s and early 1960s, the Soviet Union was attempting to develop cruise missiles. In this short time frame, the Soviet Union was working on nearly ten different types of cruise missiles. However, due to resources, most of the initial types of cruise missiles developed by the Soviet Union were Sea-Launched Cruise Missiles or Submarine-Launched Cruise Missiles (SLCMs). The SS-N-1 cruise missile was developed to have different configurations to be fired from a submarine or a ship. However, as time progressed, the Soviet Union began to work on air-launched cruise missiles as well (ALCM). These ACLM missiles were typically delivered via bombers designated as \"Blinders\" or \"Backfire\". The missiles in this configuration were called the AS-1, and AS-2 with eventual new variants with more development time. The main purpose of Soviet-based cruise missiles was to have defense and offensive mechanisms against enemy ships; in other words, most of the Soviet cruise missiles were anti-ship missiles. In the 1980s the Soviet Union had developed an arsenal of cruise missiles nearing 600 platforms which consisted of land, sea, and air delivery systems.\nUnited States.\nThe United States has deployed nine nuclear cruise missiles at one time or another.\nEfficiency in modern warfare.\nCurrently, cruise missiles are among the most expensive of single-use weapons, up to several million dollars apiece. One consequence of this is that its users face difficult choices in target allocation, to avoid expending the missiles on targets of low value. For instance, during the 2001 strikes on Afghanistan the United States attacked targets of very low monetary value with cruise missiles, which led many to question the efficiency of the weapon. However, proponents of the cruise missile counter that the weapon can not be blamed for poor target selection, and the same argument applies to other types of UAVs: they are cheaper than human pilots when total training and infrastructure costs are taken into account, not to mention the risk of loss of personnel. As demonstrated in Libya in 2011 and prior conflicts, cruise missiles are much more difficult to detect and intercept than other aerial assets (reduced radar cross-section, infrared and visual signature due to smaller size), suiting them to attacks against static air defense systems."}
{"id": "6591", "revid": "1224855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6591", "title": "Crete", "text": "Crete ( ; , , ) is the largest and most populous of the Greek islands, the 88th largest island in the world and the fifth largest island in the Mediterranean Sea, after Sicily, Sardinia, Cyprus, and Corsica. Crete is located about south of the Peloponnese, and about southwest of Anatolia. Crete has an area of and a coastline of 1,046\u00a0km (650\u00a0mi). It bounds the southern border of the Aegean Sea, with the Sea of Crete (or North Cretan Sea) to the north and the Libyan Sea (or South Cretan Sea) to the south. Crete covers 260 km from west to east but is narrow from north to south, spanning three longitudes but only half a latitude.\nCrete and a number of islands and islets that surround it constitute the Region of Crete (), which is the southernmost of the 13 top-level administrative units of Greece, and the fifth most populous of Greece's regions. Its capital and largest city is Heraklion, on the north shore of the island. , the region had a population of 624,408. The Dodecanese are located to the northeast of Crete, while the Cyclades are situated to the north, separated by the Sea of Crete. The Peloponnese is to the region's northwest.\nCrete was the center of Europe's first advanced civilization, the Minoans, from 2700 to 1420 BC. The Minoan civilization was overrun by the Mycenaean civilization from mainland Greece. Crete was later ruled by Rome, then successively by the Byzantine Empire, Andalusian Arabs, the Byzantine Empire again, the Venetian Republic, and the Ottoman Empire. In 1898 Crete, whose people had for some time wanted to join the Greek state, achieved independence from the Ottomans, formally becoming the Cretan State. Crete became part of Greece in December 1913.\nThe island is mostly mountainous, and its character is defined by a high mountain range crossing from west to east. It includes Crete's highest point, Mount Ida, and the range of the White Mountains (Lefka Ori) with 30 summits above in altitude and the Samaria Gorge, a World Biosphere Reserve. Crete forms a significant part of the economy and cultural heritage of Greece, while retaining its own local cultural traits (such as its own poetry and music). The Nikos Kazantzakis airport at Heraklion and the Daskalogiannis airport at Chania serve international travelers. The Minoan palace at Knossos is also located in Heraklion.\nName.\nThe earliest references to the island of Crete come from texts from the Syrian city of Mari dating from the 18th century BC, where the island is referred to as \"Kaptara\". This is repeated later in Neo-Assyrian records and the Bible (\"Caphtor\"). It was known in ancient Egyptian as or , strongly suggesting a similar Minoan name for the island.\nThe current name \"Crete\" is first attested in the 15th century BC in Mycenaean Greek texts, written in Linear B, through the words \"ke-re-te\" , *\"Kr\u0113tes\"; later Greek: , plural of ) and \"ke-re-si-jo\" , *\"Kr\u0113sijos\"; later Greek: , 'Cretian'). In Ancient Greek, the name Crete () first appears in Homer's \"Odyssey\". Its etymology is unknown. One proposal derives it from a hypothetical Luwian word (compare 'island', 'cutting, sliver'). Another proposal suggests that it derives from the ancient Greek word \"\"\u03ba\u03c1\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1\u03b9\u03ae\" (krataie\u0305)\", meaning strong or powerful, the reasoning being that Crete was the strongest thalassocracy during ancient times.\nIn Latin, the name of the island became . The original Arabic name of Crete was ( &lt; , but after the Emirate of Crete's establishment of its new capital at (modern Heraklion; , ), both the city and the island became known as () or (), which gave Latin, Italian, and Venetian , from which were derived French and English \"Candy\" or \"Candia\". Under Ottoman rule, in Ottoman Turkish, Crete was called (). In the Hebrew Bible, Crete is referred to as () \"kretim\".\nPhysical geography and climate.\nCrete is the largest island in Greece and the fifth largest island in the Mediterranean Sea. It is located in the southern part of the Aegean Sea separating the Aegean from the Libyan Sea.\nIsland morphology.\nThe island has an elongated shape: it spans from east to west, is at its widest point, and narrows to as little as (close to Ierapetra). Crete covers an area of , with a coastline of ; to the north, it broaches the Sea of Crete (); to the south, the Libyan Sea (); in the west, the Myrtoan Sea, and toward the east the Carpathian Sea. It lies approximately south of the Greek mainland.\nThere are a number of peninsulas and gulfs on the north side of Crete, from west to east these include: Gramvousa peninsula, gulf of Kissamos, Rodopos peninsula, gulf of Chania, Akrotiri peninsula, Souda Bay, Apokoronas cape, gulf of Almiros, gulf of Heraklion, Aforesmenos cape, gulf of Mirabello, gulf of Sitia and the Sideros peninsula. On the south side of Crete is the gulf of Messaras and Cape Lithinon.\nMountains and valleys.\nCrete is mountainous, and its character is defined by a high mountain range crossing from west to east, formed by six different groups of mountains:\nThese mountains lavish Crete with valleys, such as Amari valley, fertile plateaus, such as Lasithi plateau, Omalos and Nidha; caves, such as Gourgouthakas, Diktaion, and Idaion (the birthplace of the ancient Greek god Zeus); and a number of gorges.\nThe mountains have been seen as a key feature of the island's distinctiveness, especially since the time of Romantic travellers' writing. Contemporary Cretans distinguish between highlanders and lowlanders; the former often claim to reside in places affording a higher/better climatic and moral environment. In keeping with the legacy of Romantic authors, the mountains are seen as having determined their residents' 'resistance' to past invaders which relates to the oft-encountered idea that highlanders are 'purer' in terms of less intermarriages with occupiers. For residents of mountainous areas, such as Sfakia in western Crete, the aridness and rockiness of the mountains is emphasised as an element of pride and is often compared to the alleged soft-soiled mountains of others parts of Greece or the world.\nGorges, rivers and lakes.\nThe island has a number of gorges, such as the Samari\u00e1 Gorge, Imbros Gorge, Kourtaliotiko Gorge, Ha Gorge, Platania Gorge, the Gorge of the Dead (at Kato Zakros, Sitia) and Richtis Gorge and (Richtis) waterfall at Exo Mouliana in Sitia.\nThe rivers of Crete include the Geropotamos River, the Koiliaris, the Anapodiaris, the Almiros, the Giofyros, the Keritis, and Megas Potamos. There are only two freshwater lakes in Crete: Lake Kournas and Lake Agia, which are both in Chania regional unit. Lake Voulismeni at the coast, at Aghios Nikolaos, was formerly a freshwater lake but is now connected to the sea, in Lasithi. Three artificial lakes created by dams also exist in Crete: the lake of Aposelemis Dam, the lake of Potamos Dam, and the lake of Mpramiana Dam.\nSurrounding islands.\nA large number of islands, islets, and rocks hug the coast of Crete. Many are visited by tourists, some are only visited by archaeologists and biologists. Some are environmentally protected. A small sample of the islands includes:\nOff the south coast, the island of Gavdos is located south of Hora Sfakion and is the southernmost point of Europe.\nClimate.\nCrete straddles two climatic zones, the Mediterranean and the semi-arid climate, mainly falling within the former. As such, the climate in Crete is primarily a hot-summer Mediterranean (\"Csa\") climate while some areas in the south and east have a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"BSh\"). The higher elevations fall into the warm-summer Mediterranean climate category (\"Csb\") while the mountain peaks (&gt;2,000 meters) might feature a cold-summer Mediterranean climate (\"Csc\") or a continental climate (\"Dfb\" or \"Dfc\"). The atmosphere can be quite humid, depending on the proximity to the sea, while winter is fairly mild. Snowfall is common on the mountains between November and May, but rare in the low-lying areas.\nThe south coast, including the Mesara Plain and Asterousia Mountains, falls in the North African climatic zone, enjoying significantly more sunny days and high temperatures throughout the year. There, date palms bear fruit, and swallows remain year-round rather than migrate to Africa. The fertile region around Ierapetra, on the southeastern corner of the island, has year-round agricultural production, with summer vegetables and fruit produced in greenhouses throughout the winter. Western Crete (Chania province) receives more rain and the soils there suffer more erosion compared to the Eastern part of Crete.\nAverage annual temperatures reach up to 21.6\u00b0C in Psari Forada which is located in South Crete. Crete holds the record for the highest temperatures ever recorded in Europe during October, November, January and February from World Meteorological Organization stations. According to the Hellenic National Meteorological Service, South Crete receives the most sunshine in Greece with more than 3,257 hours of sunshine per year.\nHuman geography.\nCrete is the most populous island in Greece with a population of more than 600,000 people. Approximately 42% live in Crete's main cities and towns whilst 45% live in rural areas.\nAdministration.\nCrete with its nearby islands form the Crete Region (, , ), one of the 13 regions of Greece which were established in the 1987 administrative reform. Under the 2010 Kallikratis plan, the powers and authority of the regions were redefined and extended. The region is based at Heraklion and is divided into four regional units (pre-Kallikratis prefectures). From west to east these are: Chania, Rethymno, Heraklion, and Lasithi. These are further subdivided into 24 municipalities.\nSince 1 January 2011, the regional governor is Stavros Arnaoutakis of the Panhellenic Socialist Movement. First elected in 2010, he was re-elected in 2014, 2019 and 2023.\nCities.\nHeraklion is the largest city and capital of Crete, holding more than a fourth of the island's population. Chania was the capital until 1971. The principal cities are:\nDemographics.\nAccording to official census data by the Hellenic Statistical Authority, the region's population has increased by 1,343 people between 2011 and 2021, experiencing a rise of 0.22%. The island is home to 308,608 men and 315,800 women, accounting for 49.4% and 50.6% of the population respectively.\n&lt;graph&gt;{\n \"version\": 2,\n \"width\": 350,\n \"height\": 150,\n \"data\": [\n \"name\": \"table\",\n \"values\": [\n \"x\": 1981,\n \"y\": 502\n {\n \"x\": 1991,\n \"y\": 540\n {\n \"x\": 2001,\n \"y\": 601\n {\n \"x\": 2011,\n \"y\": 623\n {\n \"x\": 2021,\n \"y\": 624\n ]\n ],\n \"scales\": [\n \"name\": \"x\",\n \"type\": \"linear\",\n \"range\": \"width\",\n \"zero\": false,\n \"domain\": {\n \"data\": \"table\",\n \"field\": \"x\"\n },\n \"name\": \"y\",\n \"type\": \"linear\",\n \"range\": \"height\",\n \"nice\": true,\n \"domain\": {\n \"data\": \"table\",\n \"field\": \"y\"\n \"axes\": [\n \"type\": \"x\",\n \"scale\": \"x\"\n {\n \"type\": \"y\",\n \"scale\": \"y\"\n ],\n \"marks\": [\n \"type\": \"line\",\n \"from\": {\n \"data\": \"table\"\n \"properties\": {\n \"enter\": {\n \"x\": {\n \"scale\": \"x\",\n \"field\": \"x\"\n \"y\": {\n \"scale\": \"y\",\n \"field\": \"y\"\n \"y2\": {\n \"scale\": \"y\",\n \"value\": 0\n \"interpolate\": {\n \"value\": \"monotone\"\n \"stroke\": {\n \"value\": \"steelblue\"\n \"strokeWidth\": {\n \"value\": 3\n}&lt;/graph&gt;The island is divided into four regional units, Heraklion, Rethymno, Chania, and Lasithi.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Crete is predominantly based on services and tourism. However, agriculture also plays an important role and Crete is one of the few Greek islands that can support itself without a tourism industry. The economy began to change visibly during the 1970s as tourism gained in importance. Although an emphasis remains on agriculture and stock breeding, because of the climate and terrain of the island, there has been a drop in manufacturing, and an observable expansion in its service industries (mainly tourism-related). All three sectors of the Cretan economy (agriculture/farming, processing-packaging, services), are directly connected and interdependent. The island has a per capita income much higher than the Greek average, whereas unemployment is at approximately 4%, one-sixth of that of the country overall.\nAs in many regions of Greece, viticulture and olive groves are significant; oranges, citrons and avocadoes are also cultivated. Until recently there were restrictions on the import of bananas to Greece, therefore bananas were grown on the island, predominantly in greenhouses. Dairy products are important to the local economy and there are a number of specialty cheeses such as mizithra, anthotyros, and kefalotyri.\n20% of Greek wine is produced in Crete, mostly in the region of Peza. \nThe Gross domestic product (GDP) of the region was \u20ac9.4 billion in 2018, accounting for 5.1% of Greek economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was \u20ac17,800 or 59% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 68% of the EU average. Crete is the region in Greece with the fifth highest GDP per capita.\nTransport infrastructure.\nAirports.\nThe island has three significant airports, Nikos Kazantzakis at Heraklion, the Daskalogiannis airport at Chania and the smaller Sitia airport. The first two serve international routes, acting as the main gateways to the island for travellers. Work has begun plan to replace Heraklion airport with a new airport at Kasteli, where there is presently an air force base, and the new Kasteli Airport is due to open by 2027.\nFerries.\nThe island is well served by ferries, mostly from Piraeus, by ferry companies such as Minoan Lines and ANEK Lines with links to the Cyclades and Dodecanese islands. Seajets also operates routes to Cyclades. \nThe main ports from west to east are at Kissamos (ferry link to Peloponnese), Souda (Chania), Rethymno, Heraklion (links to Cyclades), Agios Nikolaos and Sitia (link to Dodecanese).\nRoad network.\nMost of Crete is served by the road network. A modern highway is currently being upgraded along the north coast connecting the four major cities (A90 motorway), the sections bypassing the main cities (Heraklion to Malia, Rethymno, Chania to Kolymvari) are at motorway standard, while the sections in between, and west to Kissamos and east to Sitia, should be completed by 2028. A link will also connect to the new Kasteli international airport . \nIn addition, a European Union study has been devised to promote a modern highway to connect the northern and southern parts of the island via a tunnel. The study proposal includes a section of road between the villages of Agia Varvara and Agia Deka in central Crete. The new road section forms part of the route between Messara in the south and Crete's largest city Heraklion, which houses the island's biggest airport and ferry links with mainland Greece.\nRailway.\nAlso, during the 1930s there was a narrow-gauge industrial railway in Heraklion, from Giofyros in the west side of the city to the port. There are now no railway lines on Crete. The government is planning the construction of a line from Chania to Heraklion via Rethymno.\nDevelopment.\nThe construction sector in Crete responded well during the pandemic and has come out strong in the post-recession recovery period. Total construction spending recovered and is expected to peak a record high (approximately 8% higher than 2019 average levels) signalling consistent expansion in construction projects and real estate investments in Crete. The evolution of the private sector in Crete is tightly linked with the demand for tourism-related investments. Moreover, the recovery of the tourism sector is expected to lead to further growth in housing prices and rental demand.\nNewspapers have reported that the Ministry of Mercantile Marine is ready to support the agreement between Greece, South Korea, Dubai Ports World and China for the construction of a large international container port and free trade zone in southern Crete near Tympaki; the plan is to expropriate of land. The port would handle two\u00a0million containers per year, but the project has not been universally welcomed because of its environmental, economic and cultural impact. As of January 2013, the project has still not been confirmed, although there is mounting pressure to approve it, arising from Greece's difficult economic situation.\nThere are plans for underwater cables going from mainland Greece to Israel and Egypt passing by Crete and Cyprus: EuroAfrica Interconnector and EuroAsia Interconnector. They would connect Crete electrically with mainland Greece, ending energy isolation of Crete. At present Greece covers electricity cost differences for Crete of around \u20ac300\u00a0million per year.\nHistory.\nIn the later Neolithic and Bronze Age periods, under the Minoans, Crete had a highly developed, literate civilization. It has been ruled by various ancient Greek entities, the Roman Empire, the Byzantine Empire, the Emirate of Crete, the Republic of Venice and the Ottoman Empire. After a brief period of independence (1897\u20131913) under a provisional Cretan government, it joined the Kingdom of Greece. It was occupied by Nazi Germany during the Second World War.\nPrehistory.\nStone tools suggest that archaic humans may have visited Crete as early as 130,000 years ago, but there is no evidence of permanent settlement of the island until the Neolithic, around 7,000 BCE. Settlements dating to the aceramic Neolithic in the 7th millennium BC, used cattle, sheep, goats, pigs and dogs as well as domesticated cereals and legumes; ancient Knossos was the site of one of these major Neolithic (then later Minoan) sites. Other neolithic settlements include those at Kephala, Magasa, and Trapeza.\nMinoan civilization.\nDuring the Bronze Age, Crete was the centre of the Minoan civilization, notable for its art, its writing systems such as Linear A, and for its massive building complexes including the palace at Knossos. Its economy benefited from a network of trade around much of the Mediterranean, and Minoan cultural influence extended to Cyprus, Canaan, and Egypt. Some scholars have speculated that legends such as that of the minotaur have a historical basis in Minoan times.\nMycenaean civilization.\nIn 1420\u00a0BC, the Minoan civilization was subsumed by the Mycenaean civilization from mainland Greece. The oldest samples of writing in the Greek language, as identified by Michael Ventris, is the Linear B archive from Knossos, dated approximately to 1425\u20131375\u00a0BC.\nArchaic and Classical period.\nAfter the Bronze Age collapse, Crete was settled by new waves of Greeks from the mainland. A number of city states developed in the Archaic period. There was limited contact with mainland Greece, and Greek historiography shows little interest in Crete, as a result, there are few literary sources.\nDuring the 6th to 4th centuries BC, Crete was comparatively free from warfare. The Gortyn code (5th century BC) is evidence for how codified civil law established a balance between aristocratic power and civil rights.\nIn the late 4th century BC, the aristocratic order began to collapse due to endemic infighting among the elite, and Crete's economy was weakened by prolonged wars between city states. During the 3rd century BC, Gortyn, Kydonia (Chania), Lyttos and Polyrrhenia challenged the primacy of ancient Knossos.\nWhile the cities continued to prey upon one another, they invited into their feuds mainland powers like Macedon and its rivals Rhodes and Ptolemaic Egypt. In 220 BC the island was tormented by a war between two opposing coalitions of cities. As a result, the Macedonian king Philip V gained hegemony over Crete which lasted to the end of the Cretan War (205\u2013200 BC), when the Rhodians opposed the rise of Macedon and the Romans started to interfere in Cretan affairs.\nIn the 2nd century BC Ierapytna (Ierapetra) gained supremacy on eastern Crete.\nRoman rule.\nCrete was involved in the Mithridatic Wars, initially repelling an attack by Roman general Marcus Antonius Creticus in 71\u00a0BC. Nevertheless, a ferocious three-year campaign soon followed under Quintus Caecilius Metellus, equipped with three legions. Crete was conquered by Rome in 69\u00a0BC, earning for Metellus the title \"Creticus\". Gortyn was made capital of the island, and Crete became a Roman province, along with Cyrenaica that was called Creta et Cyrenaica. Archaeological remains suggest that Crete under Roman rule witnessed prosperity and increased connectivity with other parts of the Empire. In the 2nd century AD, at least three cities in Crete (Lyttos, Gortyn, Hierapytna) joined the Panhellenion, a league of Greek cities founded by the emperor Hadrian. When Diocletian redivided the Empire, Crete was placed, along with Cyrene, under the diocese of Moesia, and later by Constantine I to the diocese of Macedonia.\nByzantine Empire \u2013 first period.\nCrete was separated from Cyrenaica . It remained a province within the eastern half of the Roman Empire, usually referred to as the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire after the establishment of a second capital in Constantinople by Constantine in 330. Crete was subjected to an attack by Vandals in 467, the great earthquakes of 365 and 415, a raid by Slavs in 623, Arab raids in 654 and the 670s, and again in the 8th century. In , the Emperor Leo III the Isaurian transferred the island from the jurisdiction of the Pope to that of the Patriarchate of Constantinople.\nArab rule.\nIn the 820s, after 900 years as a Roman island, Crete was captured by Andalusian Muwallads led by Abu Hafs, who established the Emirate of Crete. The Byzantines launched a campaign that took most of the island back in 842 and 843 under Theoktistos. Further Byzantine campaigns in 911 and 949 failed. In 960\u201361, Nikephoros Phokas' campaign restored Crete to the Byzantine Empire, after a century and a half of Arab control.\nByzantine Empire \u2013 second period.\nIn 961, Nikephoros Phokas returned the island to Byzantine rule after expelling the Arabs. Extensive efforts at conversion of the populace were undertaken, led by John Xenos and Nikon \"the Metanoeite\". The reconquest of Crete was a major achievement for the Byzantines, as it restored Byzantine control over the Aegean littoral and diminished the threat of Saracen pirates, for which Crete had provided a base of operations.\nIn 1204, the Fourth Crusade seized and sacked the imperial capital of Constantinople. Crete was initially granted to leading Crusader Boniface of Montferrat in the partition of spoils that followed. However, Boniface sold his claim to the Republic of Venice, whose forces made up the majority of the Crusade. Venice's rival the Republic of Genoa immediately seized the island and it was not until 1212 that Venice secured Crete as a colony.\nVenetian rule.\nFrom 1212, during Venice's rule, which lasted more than four centuries, a Renaissance swept through the island as is evident from the artistic works dating to that period. Known as The Cretan School or Post-Byzantine Art, it is among the last flowerings of the artistic traditions of the fallen empire. This included the painter El Greco and the writers Nicholas Kalliakis (1645\u20131707), Georgios Kalafatis (professor) (\u20131720), Andreas Musalus (\u20131721) and Vitsentzos Kornaros.\nUnder the rule of the Catholic Venetians, the city of Candia was reputed to be the best fortified city of the Eastern Mediterranean. The three main forts were located at Gramvousa, Spinalonga, and Fortezza at Rethymnon. Other fortifications include the Kazarma fortress at Sitia and Frangokastello in Sfakia.\nIn 1492, Jews expelled from Spain settled on the island. In 1574\u201377, Crete was under the rule of Giacomo Foscarini as Proveditor General, Sindace and Inquisitor. According to Starr's 1942 article, the rule of Giacomo Foscarini was a Dark Age for Jews and Greeks. Under his rule, non-Catholics had to pay high taxes with no allowances. In 1627, there were 800 Jews in the city of Candia, about seven percent of the city's population. Marco Foscarini was the Doge of Venice during this time.\nOttoman rule.\nThe Ottomans conquered Crete (Girit Ey\u00e2leti) in 1669, after the siege of Candia with the last Venetian strongholds off Crete falling in the last Ottoman\u2013Venetian War in 1715. Many Greek Cretans fled to other regions of the Republic of Venice after the Ottoman\u2013Venetian Wars, some even prospering such as the family of Simone Stratigo (c. 1733 \u2013 c. 1824) who migrated to Dalmatia from Crete in 1669.\nIslamic presence on the island, aside from the interlude of the Arab occupation, was cemented by the Ottoman conquest. Most Cretan Muslims were local Greek converts who spoke Cretan Greek, but in the island's 19th-century political context they came to be viewed by the Christian population as Turks. Contemporary estimates vary, but in 1830, as much as 45% of the population of the island may have been Muslim. A number of Sufi orders were widespread throughout the island, the Bektashi order being the most prevalent, possessing at least five tekkes. Many Cretan Muslims fled Crete because of sectarian violence, settling in Turkey, Rhodes, Syria, Libya and elsewhere. By 1900, 11% of the population was Muslim. Those remaining were relocated in the 1924 population exchange between Greece and Turkey.\nDuring the Russo-Turkish War (1768\u20131774), a revolt against Ottoman rule in Crete was started by Daskalogiannis, a shipowner from Sfakia who was promised support by the Russian navy which never arrived. Daskalogiannis eventually surrendered to the Ottoman authorities. Today, Chania International Airport is named after him.\nDuring the Greek War of Independence, Sultan Mahmud II granted rule over Crete to Egypt's \"de facto\" ruler Muhammad Ali Pasha in exchange for his military support. Crete was subsequently left out of the new Greek state established under the London Protocol of 1830. Its administration by Muhammad Ali was confirmed in the Convention of K\u00fctahya of 1833, but direct Ottoman rule was re-established by the Convention of London of 3 July 1840.\nHeraklion was surrounded by high walls and bastions and extended westward and southward by the 17th century. The most opulent area of the city was the northeastern quadrant where the elite were gathered. The city had received another name under the rule of the Ottomans, \"the deserted city\". The urban policy that the Ottoman applied to Candia was a two-pronged approach. The first was the religious endowments. It made the Ottoman elite contribute to building and rehabilitating the ruined city. The other method was to boost the population and the urban revenue by selling off urban properties. According to Molly Greene (2001) there were numerous records of real-estate transactions during the Ottoman rule. In the deserted city, minorities received equal rights in purchasing property. Christians and Jews were also able to buy and sell in the real-estate market.\nThe Cretan Revolt of 1866\u20131869 or Great Cretan Revolution () was a three-year uprising against Ottoman rule, the third and largest in a series of revolts between the end of the Greek War of Independence in 1830 and the establishment of the independent Cretan State in 1898. A particular event which caused strong reactions among the liberal circles of western Europe was the \"Holocaust of Arkadi\". The event occurred in November 1866, as a large Ottoman force besieged the Arkadi Monastery, which served as the headquarters of the rebellion. In addition to its 259 defenders, over 700 women and children had taken refuge in the monastery. After a few days of hard fighting, the Ottomans broke into the monastery. At that point, the abbot of the monastery set fire to the gunpowder stored in the monastery's vaults, causing the death of most of the rebels and the women and children sheltered there.\nCretan State and union with Greece.\nFollowing the repeated uprisings in 1841, 1858, 1889, 1895 and 1897 by the Cretan people, who wanted to join Greece, the Great Powers decided to restore order and in February 1897 sent in troops. The island was subsequently garrisoned by troops from Great Britain, France, Italy and Russia; Germany and Austro-Hungary withdrawing from the occupation in early 1898. During this period Crete was governed through a committee of admirals from the remaining four Powers. In March 1898 the Powers decreed, with the reluctant consent of the Sultan, that the island would be granted autonomy under Ottoman suzerainty in the near future.\nIn September 1898 the Candia massacre in Candia, modern Heraklion, left over 500 Cretan Christians and 14 British servicemen dead at the hands of Muslim irregulars. As a result, the Admirals ordered the expulsion of all Ottoman troops and administrators from the island, a move that was ultimately completed by early November. The decision to grant autonomy to the island was enforced and a High Commissioner, Prince George of Greece, appointed, arriving to take up his post in December 1898. The flag of the Cretan State was chosen by the Powers, with the white star representing the Ottoman suzerainty over the island.\nIn 1905, disagreements between Prince George and minister Eleftherios Venizelos over the question of the \"enosis\" (union with Greece), such as the Prince's autocratic style of government, resulted in the Theriso revolt, one of the leaders being Eleftherios Venizelos.\nPrince George resigned as High Commissioner and was replaced by Alexandros Zaimis, a former Greek prime minister, in 1906. In 1908, taking advantage of domestic turmoil in Turkey as well as the timing of Zaimis's vacation away from the island, the Cretan deputies unilaterally declared union with Greece.\nWith the outbreak of the First Balkan War, the Greek government declared that Crete was now Greek territory. This was not recognised internationally until 1 December 1913.\nSecond World War.\nDuring World War II, the island was the scene of the Battle of Crete in May 1941. The initial 11-day battle was bloody and left more than 11,000 soldiers and civilians killed or wounded. As a result of the fierce resistance from both Allied forces and civilian Cretan locals, the invasion force suffered heavy casualties, and Adolf Hitler forbade further large-scale paratroop operations for the rest of the war.\nDuring the initial and subsequent occupation, German firing squads routinely executed male civilians in reprisal for the death of German soldiers; civilians were rounded up randomly in local villages for the mass killings, such as at the Massacre of Kondomari and the Viannos massacres. Two German generals were later tried and executed for their roles in the killing of 3,000 of the island's inhabitants.\nFollowing the collapse of fronts elsewhere in Europe, German forces evacuated most of Crete in October 1944 leaving an area including Chania under occupation. The following year the day after VE Day the remaining Germans under Generalmajor Hans-Georg Benthack surrendered at Knossos to British Major-General Colin Callander.\nCivil War.\nIn the aftermath of the Dekemvriana in Athens, Cretan leftists were targeted by the right-wing paramilitary organization National Organization of Rethymno (EOR), which engaged in attacks in the villages of Koxare and Melampes, as well as Rethymno in January 1945. Those attacks did not escalate into a full-scale insurgency as they did in the Greek mainland and the Cretan ELAS did not surrender its weapons after the Treaty of Varkiza. An uneasy truce was maintained until 1947, with a series of arrests of notable communists in Chania and Heraklion. Encouraged by orders from the central organization in Athens, KKE launched an insurgency in Crete; marking the beginning of the Greek Civil War on the island. In eastern Crete the Democratic Army of Greece (DSE) struggled to establish its presence in Dikti and Psilorites. On 1 July 1947, the surviving 55 fighters of DSE were ambushed south of Psilorites, the few surviving members of the unit managed to join the rest of DSE in Lefka Ori.\nThe Lefka Ori region in the west offered more favourable conditions for DSE's insurgency. In the summer of 1947 DSE raided and looted the Maleme Airport and motor depot at Chrysopigi. Its numbers swelled to approximately 300 fighters. The rise of DSE numbers compounded with crop failure on the island created serious logistical issues for the insurgents. The communists resorted to cattle rustling and crop confiscations which solved the problem only temporarily. In the autumn of 1947, the Greek government offered generous amnesty terms to Cretan DSE fighters and mountain bandits, many of whom opted to abandon armed struggle or defect to the nationalists. On 4 July 1948, government troops launched a large scale offensive on Samari\u00e1 Gorge. Many DSE soldiers were killed in the fighting while the survivors broke into small armed bands. In October 1948, the secretary of the Cretan KKE Giorgos Tsitilos was killed in an ambush. By the following month only 34 DSE fighters remained active in Lefka Ori. The insurgency in Crete gradually withered away, with the last two hold outs surrendering in 1974, 25 years after the conclusion of the war in mainland Greece.\nTourism.\nCrete is one of the most popular holiday destinations in Greece. 15% of all arrivals in Greece come through the city of Heraklion (port and airport), while charter journeys to Heraklion make up about 20% of all charter flights in Greece . The number of hotel beds on the island increased by 53% in the period between 1986 and 1991.\nToday, the island's tourism infrastructure includes a wide range of accommodation; including large luxury hotels with their complete facilities, swimming pools, sports and recreation, smaller family-owned apartments, camping facilities and others. Visitors reach the island via two international airports in Heraklion and Chania and a smaller airport in Sitia (international charter and domestic flights started in May 2012) or by boat to the main ports of Heraklion, Chania, Rethimno, Agios Nikolaos and Sitia.\nPopular tourist attractions include the archaeological sites of the Minoan civilisation, the Venetian old city and port of Chania, the Venetian castle at Rethymno, the gorge of Samaria, the islands of Chrysi, Elafonisi, Gramvousa, Spinalonga and the Palm Beach of Vai, which is the largest natural palm forest in Europe.\nTransportation.\nCrete has an extensive bus system with regular services across the north of the island and from north to south. There are two regional bus stations in Heraklion. Bus routes and timetables can be found on KTEL website.\nHoliday homes and immigration.\nCrete's mild climate attracts northern Europeans who want a holiday home or residence on the island. EU citizens have the right to freely buy property and reside with little formality. In the cities of Heraklion and Chania, the average price per square metre of apartments ranges from \u20ac1,670 to \u20ac1,700. A growing number of real estate companies cater mainly to British immigrants, followed by Dutch, German, Scandinavian and other European nationalities wishing to own a home in Crete. The British immigrants are concentrated in the western regional units of Chania and Rethymno and to a lesser extent in Heraklion and Lasithi.\nArchaeological sites and museums.\nThe area has a large number of archaeological sites, including the Minoan sites of Knossos, Malia (not to be confused with the town of the same name), Zakros, Petras and Phaistos, the classical site of Gortys, and the diverse archaeology of the island of Koufonisi, which includes Minoan, Roman, and World War II era ruins (nb. due to conservation concerns, access to Koufonisi has been restricted for the last few years).\nThere are museums throughout Crete, most notably the Heraklion Archaeological Museum which displays most of the archaeological finds from the Minoan era. Other notable museums include the Maritime Museum of Crete, the Archaeological Museum of Chania, and the WW2 museum in Platinias.\nHarmful effects.\nHelen Briassoulis, in a qualitative analysis, proposed in the \"Journal of Sustainable Tourism\" that Crete is affected by tourism applying pressure to it to develop at an unhealthy rate, and that informal, internal systems within the country are forced to adapt. According to her, these forces have strengthened in three stages: from the period from 1960 to 1970, 1970\u20131990, and 1990 to the present. During this first period, tourism was a largely positive force, pushing modern developments like running water and electricity onto the largely rural countryside. However, beginning in the second period and especially in the third period leading up to the present day, tourist companies became more pushy with deforestation and pollution of Crete's natural resources. The country is then pulled into an interesting parity, where these companies only upkeep those natural resources that are directly essential to their industry.\nFauna and flora.\nFauna.\nCrete is isolated from mainland Europe, Asia, and Africa, and this is reflected in the diversity of the fauna and flora. As a result, the fauna and flora of Crete have many clues to the evolution of species. There are no animals that are dangerous to humans on the island of Crete in contrast to other parts of Greece. Indeed, the ancient Greeks attributed the lack of large mammals such as bears, wolves, jackals, and venomous snakes, to the labour of Hercules (who took a live Cretan bull to the Peloponnese). Hercules wanted to honor the birthplace of Zeus by removing all \"harmful\" and \"venomous\" animals from Crete. Later, Cretans believed that the island was cleared of dangerous creatures by the Apostle Paul, who lived on the island of Crete for two years, with his exorcisms and blessings. \nThe Natural History Museum of Crete, operates under the direction of the University of Crete and two aquariums \u2013 Aquaworld in Hersonissos and Cretaquarium in Gournes, display sea creatures common in Cretan waters.\nPrehistoric fauna.\nDwarf elephants, dwarf hippopotamus, dwarf mammoths, dwarf deer, and giant flightless owls were native to Pleistocene Crete. Their ancestors could have reached the island in the time of the Messinian salinity crisis.\nMammals.\nMammals of Crete include the vulnerable kri-kri, \"Capra aegagrus cretica\" that can be seen in the national park of the Samaria Gorge and on Thodorou, Dia and Agioi Pantes (islets off the north coast), the Cretan wildcat and the Cretan spiny mouse. Other terrestrial mammals include subspecies of the Cretan marten, the Cretan weasel, the Cretan badger, the Cretan wildcat, the long-eared hedgehog, and the edible dormouse.\nThe Cretan shrew, a type of white-toothed shrew is considered endemic to the island of Crete because this species of shrew is unknown elsewhere. It is a relic species of the \"Crocidura\" shrews of which fossils have been found that can be dated to the Pleistocene era. Today it can only be found in the highlands of Crete. It is considered to be the only surviving remnant of the endemic species of the Pleistocene Mediterranean islands.\nBat species include: Blasius's horseshoe bat, the lesser horseshoe bat, the greater horseshoe bat, the lesser mouse-eared bat, Geoffroy's bat, the whiskered bat, Kuhl's pipistrelle, the common pipistrelle, Savi's pipistrelle, the serotine bat, the long-eared bat, Schreibers' bat and the European free-tailed bat.\nBirds.\nVarieties of birds include eagles (can be seen in Lasithi), swallows (throughout Crete in the summer and year-round in the south of the island), pelicans (along the coast), and common cranes (including Gavdos and Gavdopoula). The Cretan mountains and gorges are refuges for the endangered lammergeier vulture. Bird species include: the golden eagle, Bonelli's eagle, the bearded vulture or lammergeier, the griffon vulture, Eleonora's falcon, peregrine falcon, lanner falcon, European kestrel, tawny owl, little owl, hooded crow, alpine chough, red-billed chough, and the Eurasian hoopoe. The population of griffon vultures in Crete is the largest insular one of the species in the world and consists of the majority of the griffon vulture population in Greece.\nReptiles and amphibians.\nTortoises can be seen throughout the island. Snakes can be found hiding under rocks. Toads and frogs reveal themselves when it rains.\nReptiles include the Aegean wall lizard, Balkan green lizard, common chameleon, ocellated skink, snake-eyed skink, Moorish gecko, Turkish gecko, Kotschy's gecko, spur-thighed tortoise, and the Caspian turtle.\nThere are four species of snake on the island and these are not dangerous to humans. The four species include the leopard snake (locally known as \"ochendra\"), the Balkan whip snake (locally called \"dendrogallia\"), the dice snake (called \"nerofido\" in Greek), and the only venomous snake is the nocturnal cat snake which has evolved to deliver a weak venom at the back of its mouth to paralyse geckos and small lizards, and is not dangerous to humans.\nSea turtles include the green turtle and the loggerhead turtle which are both threatened species. The loggerhead turtle nests and hatches on north-coast beaches around Rethymno and Chania, and south-coast beaches along the gulf of Mesara.\nAmphibians include the European green toad, American bullfrog (introduced), European tree frog, and the Cretan marsh frog (endemic).\nArthropods.\nCicadas, known locally as \"tzitzikia\", make a distinctive repetitive \"tzi tzi\" sound that becomes louder and more frequent on hot summer days. Butterfly species include the swallowtail butterfly. Moth species include the hummingbird moth. There are several species of scorpion such as \"Euscorpius carpathicus\" whose venom is generally no more potent than a mosquito bite.\nCrustaceans and molluscs.\nRiver crabs include the semi-terrestrial \"Potamon potamios\" crab. Edible snails are widespread and can cluster in the hundreds waiting for rainfall to reinvigorate them.\nSealife.\nApart from terrestrial mammals, the seas around Crete are rich in large marine mammals. The endangered Mediterranean monk seal lives in almost all the coasts of the country. The area south of Crete, known as the Greek Abyss, hosts whales, sperm whales, dolphins and porpoises. The Minoan frescoes depicting dolphins in Queen's Megaron at Knossos indicate that Minoans were well aware of and celebrated these creatures. Squid, octopus, sea turtles and hammerhead sharks live or traverse along the coast.\nSome of the fish of the waters around Crete include: scorpion fish, dusky grouper, east Atlantic peacock wrasse, five-spotted wrasse, weever fish, common stingray, brown ray, Mediterranean black goby, pearly razorfish, star-gazer, painted comber, damselfish, and the flying gurnard.\nThe Cretaquarium and the Aquaworld Aquarium, are two of the three aquariums in Greece. They are located in Gournes and Hersonissos respectively.\nFlora.\nThe Minoans contributed to the deforestation of Crete. Further deforestation occurred in the 1600s \"so that no more local supplies of firewood were available\".\nCommon wildflowers include: camomile, daisy, gladiolus, hyacinth, iris, poppy, cyclamen and tulip, among others. There are more than 200 species of wild orchid on the island and this includes 14 varieties of \"Ophrys cretica\". Crete has a rich variety of indigenous herbs including common sage, rosemary, thyme, and oregano. Rare herbs include the endemic Cretan dittany and ironwort, \"Sideritis syriaca\", known as malotira (\u03bc\u03b1\u03bb\u03bf\u03c4\u03ae\u03c1\u03b1). Varieties of cactus include the edible prickly pear. Common trees on the island include the chestnut, cypress, oak, olive tree, pine, plane, and tamarisk. Trees tend to be taller to the west of the island where water is more abundant.\nEnvironmentally protected areas.\nEnvironmentally protected areas include the island of Elafonisi on the coast of southwestern Crete, the palm forest of Vai in eastern Crete and the Dionysades (both in the municipality of Sitia, Lasithi). Vai has a palm beach and is the largest natural palm forest in Europe. The island of Chrysi, south of Ierapetra, has the largest naturally-grown \"Juniperus macrocarpa\" forest in Europe. Samaria Gorge is a World Biosphere Reserve and Richtis Gorge is protected for its landscape diversity. Also, Sitia UNESCO Global Geopark, added in 2015 in UNESCO Geoparks, is located on the easternmost edge of Crete.\nMythology.\nCrete has a strong association with ancient Greek gods but is also connected with the Minoan civilization.\nAccording to Greek mythology, the Diktaean Cave at Mount Dikti was the birthplace of the god Zeus. The Paximadia islands were the birthplace of the goddess Artemis and the god Apollo . Their mother, the goddess Leto, was worshipped at Phaistos. The goddess Athena bathed in Lake Voulismeni. Zeus launched a lightning bolt at a giant lizard that was threatening Crete. The lizard immediately turned to stone and became the lizard-shaped island of Dia, which can be seen from Knossos. The islets of Lefkai were the result of a musical contest between the Sirens and the Muses. The Muses were so anguished to have lost that they plucked the feathers from the wings of their rivals; the Sirens turned white and fell into the sea at Aptera (\"featherless\"), where they formed the islands in the bay that were called Lefkai (the islands of Souda and Leon). Heracles, in one of his labors, took the Cretan bull to the Peloponnese. Europa and Zeus made love at Gortys and conceived the kings of Crete: Rhadamanthys, Sarpedon, and Minos.\nThe labyrinth of the Palace of Knossos was the setting for the myth of Theseus and the Minotaur in which the Minotaur was slain by Theseus. Icarus and Daedalus were captives of King Minos and crafted wings to escape. After his death, King Minos became a judge of the dead in Hades, while Rhadamanthys became the ruler of the Elysian fields.\nCulture.\nCrete has its own distinctive Mantinades poetry. The island is known for its Mantinades-based music (typically performed with the Cretan lyra and the laouto) and has many indigenous dances, the most noted of which is the Pentozali. Since the 1980s and certainly in the 1990s onwards there has been a proliferation of cultural associations that teach dancing (in Western Crete where many focus on rizitiko singing). These associations often perform in official events but also become stages for people to meet and engage in traditional practices. The topic of tradition and the role of cultural associations in reviving it is often debated throughout Crete.\nCretan authors have made important contributions to Greek literature throughout the modern period; major names include Vikentios Kornaros, creator of the 17th-century epic romance \"Erotokritos\" (Greek \u0395\u03c1\u03c9\u03c4\u03cc\u03ba\u03c1\u03b9\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2), and, in the 20th century, Nikos Kazantzakis. In the Renaissance, Crete was the home of the Cretan School of icon painting, which influenced El Greco and through him subsequent European painting.\nCretans are proud of their island and customs, and men often don elements of traditional dress in everyday life: knee-high black riding boots (\"stivania\"), \"vr\u00e1ka\" breeches tucked into the boots at the knee, black shirt and black headdress consisting of a fishnet-weave kerchief worn wrapped around the head or draped on the shoulders (\"mantili\" / \"kefalomantilo\"). Men often grow large mustaches as a mark of pride, manhood and valiance.\nCretan society is known in Greece and internationally for family and clan vendettas which persist on the island to date. Cretans also have a tradition of keeping firearms at home, stemming from the era of resistance against the Ottoman Empire. Nearly every rural household on Crete has at least one unregistered gun. Guns are subject to strict regulation from the Greek government, and in recent years an effort to control firearms in Crete has been undertaken by the Greek police, but with limited success.\nSports.\nCrete has many football clubs playing in the local leagues. During the 2011\u201312 season, OFI Crete, which plays at Theodoros Vardinogiannis Stadium (Iraklion), and Ergotelis F.C., which plays at the Pankritio Stadium (Iraklion) were both members of the Greek Superleague. During the 2012\u201313 season, OFI Crete, which plays at Theodoros Vardinogiannis Stadium (Iraklion), and Platanias F.C., which plays at the Perivolia Municipal Stadium, near Chania, are both members of the Greek Superleague.\nNotable people.\nNotable people from Crete include:"}
{"id": "6592", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6592", "title": "Cyclades", "text": "The Cyclades (; , ) are an island group in the Aegean Sea, southeast of mainland Greece and a former administrative prefecture of Greece. They are one of the island groups which constitute the Aegean archipelago. The name () refers to the archipelago forming a circle \"around\" the sacred island of Delos. The largest island of the Cyclades is Naxos, however the most populated is Syros.\nHistory.\nThe significant Late Neolithic and Early Bronze Age Cycladic culture is best known for its schematic, flat sculptures carved out of the islands' pure white marble centuries before the great Middle Bronze Age Minoan civilization arose in Crete to the south. (These figures have been looted from burials to satisfy a thriving Cycladic antiquities market since the early 20th century.)\nA distinctive Neolithic culture amalgamating Anatolian and mainland Greek elements arose in the western Aegean before 4000 BCE, based on emmer and wild-type barley, sheep and goats, pigs, and tuna that were apparently speared from small boats (Rutter). Excavated sites include Chalandriani, Phylakopi, Skarkos, Saliagos and Kephala (on Kea) with signs of copperworking, Each of the small Cycladic islands could support no more than a few thousand people, though Late Cycladic boat models show that fifty oarsmen could be assembled from the scattered communities (Rutter), and when the highly organized palace-culture of Crete arose, the islands faded into insignificance, with the exception of Delos, which retained its archaic reputation as a sanctuary throughout antiquity and until the emergence of Christianity.\nArchaeology.\nThe first archaeological excavations of the 1880s, undertaken by antiquaries such as Theodore Bent at Antiparos in early 1884, were followed by systematic work by the British School at Athens and by Christos Tsountas, who investigated burial sites on several islands in 1898\u20131899 and coined the term \"Cycladic civilization\". Interest lagged, and then picked up in the mid-20th century, as collectors competed for the modern-looking figures that seemed so similar to sculpture by Jean Arp or Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i. Sites were looted and a brisk trade in forgeries arose. The context for many of these Cycladic figurines has been mostly destroyed and their meaning may never be completely understood. \nAnother intriguing and mysterious object is that of the Cycladic frying pans. More accurate archaeology has revealed the broad outlines of a farming and seafaring culture that had emigrated from Anatolia . Early Cycladic culture evolved in three phases, between c.\u00a03300 \u2013 2000 BCE, when it was increasingly swamped in the rising influence of Minoan Crete. The culture of mainland Greece contemporary with Cycladic culture is known as the Helladic period.\nIn recent decades the Cyclades have become popular with European and other tourists, and as a result there have been problems with erosion, pollution, and water shortages.\nGeography.\nThe Cyclades includes about 220 islands, the major ones being Amorgos, Anafi, Andros, Antiparos, Delos, Ios, Kea, Kimolos, Kythnos, Milos, Mykonos, Naxos, Paros, Folegandros, Serifos, Sifnos, Sikinos, Syros, Tinos, and Thira or Santor\u00edni. There are also many minor islands (the Lesser Cyclades) including Donousa, Eschati, Gyaros, Irakleia, Koufonisia, Makronisos, Rineia, and Schoinousa. The name \"Cyclades\" refers to the islands forming a circle (\"circular islands\") around the sacred island of Delos. Most of the smaller islands are uninhabited.\nErmoupoli on Syros is the chief town and administrative center of the former prefecture.\nThe islands are peaks of a submerged mountainous terrain, with the exception of two volcanic islands, Milos and Santorini. The climate is generally dry and mild, but with the exception of Naxos, the soil is not very fertile; agricultural produce includes wine, fruit, wheat, olive oil, and tobacco. Lower temperatures are registered in higher elevations and these areas do not usually see wintry weather.\nThe Cyclades are bounded to the south by the Sea of Crete.\nAdministration.\nThe Cyclades Prefecture () was one of the prefectures of Greece. As a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, the prefecture was abolished, and its territory was divided into nine regional units of the South Aegean region:\nMunicipalities and communities.\nThe prefecture was subdivided into the following municipalities and communities. These have been reorganised at the 2011 Kallikratis reform as well. \nProvinces.\n\"Note:\" Provinces no longer hold any legal status in Greece.\nCuisine.\nLocal specialities of the Cyclades include:"}
{"id": "6594", "revid": "438626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6594", "title": "Casimir IV Jagiello", "text": ""}
{"id": "6595", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6595", "title": "Computer Vision", "text": ""}
{"id": "6596", "revid": "6908984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6596", "title": "Computer vision", "text": "Computer vision tasks include methods for acquiring, processing, analyzing, and understanding digital images, and extraction of high-dimensional data from the real world in order to produce numerical or symbolic information, e.g. in the form of decisions. \"Understanding\" in this context signifies the transformation of visual images (the input to the retina) into descriptions of the world that make sense to thought processes and can elicit appropriate action. This image understanding can be seen as the disentangling of symbolic information from image data using models constructed with the aid of geometry, physics, statistics, and learning theory.\nThe scientific discipline of computer vision is concerned with the theory behind artificial systems that extract information from images. Image data can take many forms, such as video sequences, views from multiple cameras, multi-dimensional data from a 3D scanner, 3D point clouds from LiDaR sensors, or medical scanning devices. The technological discipline of computer vision seeks to apply its theories and models to the construction of computer vision systems.\nSubdisciplines of computer vision include scene reconstruction, object detection, event detection, activity recognition, video tracking, object recognition, 3D pose estimation, learning, indexing, motion estimation, visual servoing, 3D scene modeling, and image restoration.\nDefinition.\nComputer vision is an interdisciplinary field that deals with how computers can be made to gain high-level understanding from digital images or videos. From the perspective of engineering, it seeks to automate tasks that the human visual system can do. \"Computer vision is concerned with the automatic extraction, analysis, and understanding of useful information from a single image or a sequence of images. It involves the development of a theoretical and algorithmic basis to achieve automatic visual understanding.\" As a scientific discipline, computer vision is concerned with the theory behind artificial systems that extract information from images. The image data can take many forms, such as video sequences, views from multiple cameras, or multi-dimensional data from a medical scanner. As a technological discipline, computer vision seeks to apply its theories and models for the construction of computer vision systems. Machine vision refers to a systems engineering discipline, especially in the context of factory automation. In more recent times, the terms computer vision and machine vision have converged to a greater degree.\nHistory.\nIn the late 1960s, computer vision began at universities that were pioneering artificial intelligence. It was meant to mimic the human visual system as a stepping stone to endowing robots with intelligent behavior. In 1966, it was believed that this could be achieved through an undergraduate summer project, by attaching a camera to a computer and having it \"describe what it saw\".\nWhat distinguished computer vision from the prevalent field of digital image processing at that time was a desire to extract three-dimensional structure from images with the goal of achieving full scene understanding. Studies in the 1970s formed the early foundations for many of the computer vision algorithms that exist today, including extraction of edges from images, labeling of lines, non-polyhedral and polyhedral modeling, representation of objects as interconnections of smaller structures, optical flow, and motion estimation.\nThe next decade saw studies based on more rigorous mathematical analysis and quantitative aspects of computer vision. These include the concept of scale-space, the inference of shape from various cues such as shading, texture and focus, and contour models known as snakes. Researchers also realized that many of these mathematical concepts could be treated within the same optimization framework as regularization and Markov random fields.\nBy the 1990s, some of the previous research topics became more active than others. Research in projective 3-D reconstructions led to better understanding of camera calibration. With the advent of optimization methods for camera calibration, it was realized that a lot of the ideas were already explored in bundle adjustment theory from the field of photogrammetry. This led to methods for sparse 3-D reconstructions of scenes from multiple images. Progress was made on the dense stereo correspondence problem and further multi-view stereo techniques. At the same time, variations of graph cut were used to solve image segmentation. This decade also marked the first time statistical learning techniques were used in practice to recognize faces in images (see Eigenface). Toward the end of the 1990s, a significant change came about with the increased interaction between the fields of computer graphics and computer vision. This included image-based rendering, image morphing, view interpolation, panoramic image stitching and early light-field rendering.\nRecent work has seen the resurgence of feature-based methods used in conjunction with machine learning techniques and complex optimization frameworks. \nThe advancement of Deep Learning techniques has brought further life to the field of computer vision. The accuracy of deep learning algorithms on several benchmark computer vision data sets for tasks ranging from classification, segmentation and optical flow has surpassed prior methods. \nRelated fields.\nSolid-state physics.\nSolid-state physics is another field that is closely related to computer vision. Most computer vision systems rely on image sensors, which detect electromagnetic radiation, which is typically in the form of either visible, infrared or ultraviolet light. The sensors are designed using quantum physics. The process by which light interacts with surfaces is explained using physics. Physics explains the behavior of optics which are a core part of most imaging systems. Sophisticated image sensors even require quantum mechanics to provide a complete understanding of the image formation process. Also, various measurement problems in physics can be addressed using computer vision, for example, motion in fluids.\nNeurobiology.\nNeurobiology has greatly influenced the development of computer vision algorithms. Over the last century, there has been an extensive study of eyes, neurons, and brain structures devoted to the processing of visual stimuli in both humans and various animals. This has led to a coarse yet convoluted description of how natural vision systems operate in order to solve certain vision-related tasks. These results have led to a sub-field within computer vision where artificial systems are designed to mimic the processing and behavior of biological systems at different levels of complexity. Also, some of the learning-based methods developed within computer vision (\"e.g.\" neural net and deep learning based image and feature analysis and classification) have their background in neurobiology. The Neocognitron, a neural network developed in the 1970s by Kunihiko Fukushima, is an early example of computer vision taking direct inspiration from neurobiology, specifically the primary visual cortex.\nSome strands of computer vision research are closely related to the study of biological vision\u2014indeed, just as many strands of AI research are closely tied with research into human intelligence and the use of stored knowledge to interpret, integrate, and utilize visual information. The field of biological vision studies and models the physiological processes behind visual perception in humans and other animals. Computer vision, on the other hand, develops and describes the algorithms implemented in software and hardware behind artificial vision systems. An interdisciplinary exchange between biological and computer vision has proven fruitful for both fields.\nSignal processing.\nYet another field related to computer vision is signal processing. Many methods for processing one-variable signals, typically temporal signals, can be extended in a natural way to the processing of two-variable signals or multi-variable signals in computer vision. However, because of the specific nature of images, there are many methods developed within computer vision that have no counterpart in the processing of one-variable signals. Together with the multi-dimensionality of the signal, this defines a subfield in signal processing as a part of computer vision.\nRobotic navigation.\nRobot navigation sometimes deals with autonomous path planning or deliberation for robotic systems to navigate through an environment. A detailed understanding of these environments is required to navigate through them. Information about the environment could be provided by a computer vision system, acting as a vision sensor and providing high-level information about the environment and the robot\nOther fields.\nBesides the above-mentioned views on computer vision, many of the related research topics can also be studied from a purely mathematical point of view. For example, many methods in computer vision are based on statistics, optimization or geometry. Finally, a significant part of the field is devoted to the implementation aspect of computer vision; how existing methods can be realized in various combinations of software and hardware, or how these methods can be modified in order to gain processing speed without losing too much performance. Computer vision is also used in fashion eCommerce, inventory management, patent search, furniture, and the beauty industry.\nDistinctions.\nThe fields most closely related to computer vision are image processing, image analysis and machine vision. There is a significant overlap in the range of techniques and applications that these cover. This implies that the basic techniques that are used and developed in these fields are similar, something which can be interpreted as there is only one field with different names. On the other hand, it appears to be necessary for research groups, scientific journals, conferences, and companies to present or market themselves as belonging specifically to one of these fields and, hence, various characterizations which distinguish each of the fields from the others have been presented. In image processing, the input is an image and the output is an image as well, whereas in computer vision, an image or a video is taken as an input and the output could be an enhanced image, an understanding of the content of an image or even behavior of a computer system based on such understanding.\nComputer graphics produces image data from 3D models, and computer vision often produces 3D models from image data. There is also a trend towards a combination of the two disciplines, \"e.g.\", as explored in augmented reality.\nThe following characterizations appear relevant but should not be taken as universally accepted:\nPhotogrammetry also overlaps with computer vision, e.g., stereophotogrammetry vs. computer stereo vision.\nApplications.\nApplications range from tasks such as industrial machine vision systems which, say, inspect bottles speeding by on a production line, to research into artificial intelligence and computers or robots that can comprehend the world around them. The computer vision and machine vision fields have significant overlap. Computer vision covers the core technology of automated image analysis which is used in many fields. Machine vision usually refers to a process of combining automated image analysis with other methods and technologies to provide automated inspection and robot guidance in industrial applications. In many computer-vision applications, computers are pre-programmed to solve a particular task, but methods based on learning are now becoming increasingly common. Examples of applications of computer vision include systems for:\nMedicine.\nOne of the most prominent application fields is medical computer vision, or medical image processing, characterized by the extraction of information from image data to diagnose a patient. An example of this is the detection of tumours, arteriosclerosis or other malign changes, and a variety of dental pathologies; measurements of organ dimensions, blood flow, etc. are another example. It also supports medical research by providing new information: \"e.g.\", about the structure of the brain or the quality of medical treatments. Applications of computer vision in the medical area also include enhancement of images interpreted by humans\u2014ultrasonic images or X-ray images, for example\u2014to reduce the influence of noise.\nMachine vision.\nA second application area in computer vision is in industry, sometimes called machine vision, where information is extracted for the purpose of supporting a production process. One example is quality control where details or final products are being automatically inspected in order to find defects. One of the most prevalent fields for such inspection is the Wafer industry in which every single Wafer is being measured and inspected for inaccuracies or defects to prevent a computer chip from coming to market in an unusable manner. Another example is a measurement of the position and orientation of details to be picked up by a robot arm. Machine vision is also heavily used in the agricultural processes to remove undesirable foodstuff from bulk material, a process called optical sorting.\nMilitary.\nMilitary applications are probably one of the largest areas of computer vision. The obvious examples are the detection of enemy soldiers or vehicles and missile guidance. More advanced systems for missile guidance send the missile to an area rather than a specific target, and target selection is made when the missile reaches the area based on locally acquired image data. Modern military concepts, such as \"battlefield awareness\", imply that various sensors, including image sensors, provide a rich set of information about a combat scene that can be used to support strategic decisions. In this case, automatic processing of the data is used to reduce complexity and to fuse information from multiple sensors to increase reliability.\nAutonomous vehicles.\nOne of the newer application areas is autonomous vehicles, which include submersibles, land-based vehicles (small robots with wheels, cars, or trucks), aerial vehicles, and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV). The level of autonomy ranges from fully autonomous (unmanned) vehicles to vehicles where computer-vision-based systems support a driver or a pilot in various situations. Fully autonomous vehicles typically use computer vision for navigation, e.g., for knowing where they are or mapping their environment (SLAM), for detecting obstacles. It can also be used for detecting certain task-specific events, \"e.g.\", a UAV looking for forest fires. Examples of supporting systems are obstacle warning systems in cars, cameras and LiDAR sensors in vehicles, and systems for autonomous landing of aircraft. Several car manufacturers have demonstrated systems for autonomous driving of cars. There are ample examples of military autonomous vehicles ranging from advanced missiles to UAVs for recon missions or missile guidance. Space exploration is already being made with autonomous vehicles using computer vision, \"e.g.\", NASA's \"Curiosity\" and CNSA's \"Yutu-2\" rover.\nTactile feedback.\nMaterials such as rubber and silicon are being used to create sensors that allow for applications such as detecting microundulations and calibrating robotic hands. Rubber can be used in order to create a mold that can be placed over a finger, inside of this mold would be multiple strain gauges. The finger mold and sensors could then be placed on top of a small sheet of rubber containing an array of rubber pins. A user can then wear the finger mold and trace a surface. A computer can then read the data from the strain gauges and measure if one or more of the pins are being pushed upward. If a pin is being pushed upward then the computer can recognize this as an imperfection in the surface. This sort of technology is useful in order to receive accurate data on imperfections on a very large surface. Another variation of this finger mold sensor are sensors that contain a camera suspended in silicon. The silicon forms a dome around the outside of the camera and embedded in the silicon are point markers that are equally spaced. These cameras can then be placed on devices such as robotic hands in order to allow the computer to receive highly accurate tactile data.\nOther application areas include:\nTypical tasks.\nEach of the application areas described above employ a range of computer vision tasks; more or less well-defined measurement problems or processing problems, which can be solved using a variety of methods. Some examples of typical computer vision tasks are presented below.\nComputer vision tasks include methods for acquiring, processing, analyzing and understanding digital images, and extraction of high-dimensional data from the real world in order to produce numerical or symbolic information, \"e.g.\", in the forms of decisions. Understanding in this context means the transformation of visual images (the input of the retina) into descriptions of the world that can interface with other thought processes and elicit appropriate action. This image understanding can be seen as the disentangling of symbolic information from image data using models constructed with the aid of geometry, physics, statistics, and learning theory.\nRecognition.\nThe classical problem in computer vision, image processing, and machine vision is that of determining whether or not the image data contains some specific object, feature, or activity. Different varieties of recognition problem are described in the literature.\nCurrently, the best algorithms for such tasks are based on convolutional neural networks. An illustration of their capabilities is given by the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge; this is a benchmark in object classification and detection, with millions of images and 1000 object classes used in the competition. Performance of convolutional neural networks on the ImageNet tests is now close to that of humans. The best algorithms still struggle with objects that are small or thin, such as a small ant on the stem of a flower or a person holding a quill in their hand. They also have trouble with images that have been distorted with filters (an increasingly common phenomenon with modern digital cameras). By contrast, those kinds of images rarely trouble humans. Humans, however, tend to have trouble with other issues. For example, they are not good at classifying objects into fine-grained classes, such as the particular breed of dog or species of bird, whereas convolutional neural networks handle this with ease.\nSeveral specialized tasks based on recognition exist, such as:\nMotion analysis.\nSeveral tasks relate to motion estimation, where an image sequence is processed to produce an estimate of the velocity either at each points in the image or in the 3D scene or even of the camera that produces the images. Examples of such tasks are:\nScene reconstruction.\nGiven one or (typically) more images of a scene, or a video, scene reconstruction aims at computing a 3D model of the scene. In the simplest case, the model can be a set of 3D points. More sophisticated methods produce a complete 3D surface model. The advent of 3D imaging not requiring motion or scanning, and related processing algorithms is enabling rapid advances in this field. Grid-based 3D sensing can be used to acquire 3D images from multiple angles. Algorithms are now available to stitch multiple 3D images together into point clouds and 3D models.\nImage restoration.\nImage restoration comes into the picture when the original image is degraded or damaged due to some external factors like lens wrong positioning, transmission interference, low lighting or motion blurs, etc., which is referred to as noise. When the images are degraded or damaged, the information to be extracted from them also gets damaged. Therefore, we need to recover or restore the image as it was intended to be. The aim of image restoration is the removal of noise (sensor noise, motion blur, etc.) from images. The simplest possible approach for noise removal is various types of filters, such as low-pass filters or median filters. More sophisticated methods assume a model of how the local image structures look to distinguish them from noise. By first analyzing the image data in terms of the local image structures, such as lines or edges, and then controlling the filtering based on local information from the analysis step, a better level of noise removal is usually obtained compared to the simpler approaches.\nAn example in this field is inpainting.\nSystem methods.\nThe organization of a computer vision system is highly application-dependent. Some systems are stand-alone applications that solve a specific measurement or detection problem, while others constitute a sub-system of a larger design which, for example, also contains sub-systems for control of mechanical actuators, planning, information databases, man-machine interfaces, etc. The specific implementation of a computer vision system also depends on whether its functionality is pre-specified or if some part of it can be learned or modified during operation. Many functions are unique to the application. There are, however, typical functions that are found in many computer vision systems.\nImage-understanding systems.\nImage-understanding systems (IUS) include three levels of abstraction as follows: low level includes image primitives such as edges, texture elements, or regions; intermediate level includes boundaries, surfaces and volumes; and high level includes objects, scenes, or events. Many of these requirements are entirely topics for further research.\nThe representational requirements in the designing of IUS for these levels are: representation of prototypical concepts, concept organization, spatial knowledge, temporal knowledge, scaling, and description by comparison and differentiation.\nWhile inference refers to the process of deriving new, not explicitly represented facts from currently known facts, control refers to the process that selects which of the many inference, search, and matching techniques should be applied at a particular stage of processing. Inference and control requirements for IUS are: search and hypothesis activation, matching and hypothesis testing, generation and use of expectations, change and focus of attention, certainty and strength of belief, inference and goal satisfaction.\nHardware.\nThere are many kinds of computer vision systems; however, all of them contain these basic elements: a power source, at least one image acquisition device (camera, ccd, etc.), a processor, and control and communication cables or some kind of wireless interconnection mechanism. In addition, a practical vision system contains software, as well as a display in order to monitor the system. Vision systems for inner spaces, as most industrial ones, contain an illumination system and may be placed in a controlled environment. Furthermore, a completed system includes many accessories, such as camera supports, cables, and connectors.\nMost computer vision systems use visible-light cameras passively viewing a scene at frame rates of at most 60 frames per second (usually far slower).\nA few computer vision systems use image-acquisition hardware with active illumination or something other than visible light or both, such as structured-light 3D scanners, thermographic cameras, hyperspectral imagers, radar imaging, lidar scanners, magnetic resonance images, side-scan sonar, synthetic aperture sonar, etc. Such hardware captures \"images\" that are then processed often using the same computer vision algorithms used to process visible-light images.\nWhile traditional broadcast and consumer video systems operate at a rate of 30 frames per second, advances in digital signal processing and consumer graphics hardware has made high-speed image acquisition, processing, and display possible for real-time systems on the order of hundreds to thousands of frames per second. For applications in robotics, fast, real-time video systems are critically important and often can simplify the processing needed for certain algorithms. When combined with a high-speed projector, fast image acquisition allows 3D measurement and feature tracking to be realized.\nEgocentric vision systems are composed of a wearable camera that automatically take pictures from a first-person perspective.\nAs of 2016, vision processing units are emerging as a new class of processors to complement CPUs and graphics processing units (GPUs) in this role."}
{"id": "6597", "revid": "1272984659", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6597", "title": "Curry", "text": "Curry is a dish with a sauce or gravy seasoned with spices, mainly derived from the interchange of Indian cuisine with European taste in food, starting with the Portuguese, followed by the Dutch and British, and then thoroughly internationalised. Many dishes that would be described as curries in English are found in the native cuisines of countries in Southeast Asia and East Asia. The English word is derived indirectly from some combination of Dravidian words such as the Tamil \"\" () meaning 'sauce' or 'relish for rice'.\nA first step in the creation of curry was the arrival in India of spicy hot chili peppers, along with other ingredients such as tomatoes and potatoes, part of the Columbian exchange of plants between the Old World and the New World. During the British Raj, Anglo-Indian cuisine developed, leading to Hannah Glasse's 18th century recipe for \"currey the India way\" in England. Curry was then spread in the 19th century by indentured Indian sugar workers to the Caribbean, and by British traders to Japan. Further exchanges around the world made curry a fully international dish.\nMany types of curry exist in different countries. In Southeast Asia, curry often contains a spice paste and coconut milk. In India, the spices are fried in oil or ghee to create a paste; this may be combined with a water-based broth, or sometimes with milk or coconut milk. In China and Korea, curries are based on a commercial curry powder. Curry restaurants outside their native countries often adapt their cuisine to suit local tastes; for instance, Thai restaurants in the West sell red, yellow, and green curries with chili peppers of those colours, often combined with additional spices of the same colours. In Britain, curry has become a national dish, with some types adopted from India, others modified or wholly invented, as with chicken tikka masala, created by British Bangladeshi restaurants in the 20th century.\nEtymology.\n'Curry' is \"ultimately derived\" from some combination of Dravidian words of south Indian languages. One of those words is the Middle Tamil \"\" () meaning 'black' or 'burnt' and hence spiced food. The Oxford Dictionaries suggest an origin specifically from Tamil. Other Dravidian languages, namely Malayalam (\u0d15\u0d31\u0d3f \"kari\", \"hot condiments; meats, vegetables\"), Middle Kannada and Kodava, have similar words. \"Ka\u1e5fi\" is described in a 17th century Portuguese cookbook who were trading with Tamil merchants along the Coromandel Coast of southeast India, becoming known as a \"spice blend ... called \"kari podi\" or curry powder\". The first appearance in its anglicised form (spelt \"currey\") was in Hannah Glasse's 1747 book \"The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy\".\nThe term \"curry\" is not derived from the name of the curry tree, although some curries do include curry leaves among many other spices. It is not related, either, to the word \"cury\" in \"The Forme of Cury\", a 1390s English cookbook; that term comes from the Middle French word \"cuire\", meaning 'to cook'.\nCultural exchanges.\nAncient spice trade in Asia.\nAustronesian merchants in South East Asia traded spices along marine trade routes between South Asia (primarily the ports on the south eastern coast of India and Sri Lanka) and East Asia as far back at 5000 BCE. Archaeological evidence dating to 2600 BCE from Mohenjo-daro suggests the use of mortar and pestle to pound spices including mustard, fennel, cumin, and tamarind pods with which they flavoured food. Black pepper is native to the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia and has been known to Indian cooking since at least 2000 BCE. The three basic ingredients of the spicy stew were ginger, garlic, and turmeric. Using starch grain analysis, archaeologists identified the residue of these spices in both skeletons and pottery shards from excavations in India, finding that turmeric and ginger were present. Sauces in India before Columbus could contain black pepper or long pepper to provide a little heat, but not chili, so they were not spicy hot by modern standards.\nEarly modern trade.\nThe establishment of the Mughal Empire, in the early 16th century, influenced some curries, especially in the north. Another influence was the establishment of the Portuguese trading centre in Goa in 1510, resulting in the introduction of chili peppers, tomatoes and potatoes to India from the Americas, as a byproduct of the Columbian Exchange. The scholar of food culture Lizzie Collingham suggests that the Portuguese in Goa (in West India) heard and adopted words adopted into a local language from the Dravidian words from South India, becoming \"caril\" or \"carree\" as transcribed by British travellers of the time. This adoption resulting eventually in curry's modern meaning of a dish, often spiced, in a sauce or gravy. In 1598, an English translation of a Dutch book about travel in the East Indies mentioned a \"somewhat sour\" broth called \"Carriel\", eaten with rice. The later Dutch word was used in the Dutch East Indies from the 19th century; many Indians had by then migrated to Southeast Asia. \nBritish influence.\nCurry was introduced to English cuisine from Anglo-Indian cooking in the 17th century, as spicy sauces were added to plain boiled and cooked meats. That cuisine was created in the British Raj when British wives or memsahibs instructed Indian cooks on the food they wanted, transforming many dishes in the process. Further, in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, when there were few British women in India, British men often lived with Indian mistresses, acquiring the local customs, language, and food. Curry was first served in coffee houses in Britain from 1809.\nIndian cooks in the 19th century prepared curries for their British masters simplified and adjusted to Anglo-Indian taste. For instance, a \"quarama\" from Lucknow contained (among other ingredients) ghee, yoghurt, cream, crushed almonds, cloves, cardamom, and saffron; whereas an 1869 Anglo-Indian \"quorema\" or \"korma\", \"different in substance as well as name\", had no cream, almonds, or saffron, but it added the then-standard British curry spices, namely coriander, ginger, and black peppercorns. Curry, initially understood as \"an unfamiliar set of Indian stews and ragouts\", had become \"a dish in its own right, created for the British in India\". Collingham describes the resulting Anglo-Indian cuisine as \"eclectic\", \"pan-Indian\", \"lacking sophistication\", embodying a \"passion for garnishes\", and forming a \"coherent repertoire\"; but it was eaten only by the British. Collingham writes that \"The idea of a curry is, in fact, a concept that the Europeans imposed on India's food culture. Indians referred to their different dishes by specific names... But the British lumped all these together under the heading of curry.\nElsewhere in the 19th century, curry was carried to the Caribbean by Indian indentured workers in the British sugar industry.\nGlobalisation.\nSince the mid-20th century, curries of many national styles have become popular far from their origins, and increasingly become part of international fusion cuisine. Alan Davidson writes that curry's worldwide extension is a result of the Indian diaspora and globalisation, starting within the British Empire, and followed by economic migrants who brought Indian cuisine to many countries. In 1886, \u5496\u55b1 (\"G\u0101l\u00ed\") (Chinese pronunciation of \"curry\") appeared among the Chinese in Singapore. Malay Chinese people then most likely brought curry to China.\nIn India, spices are always freshly prepared for use in sauces. Derived from such mixtures (but not containing curry leaves), curry powder is a ready-prepared spice blend first sold by Indian merchants to European colonial traders. This was commercially available from the late 18th century, with brands such as Crosse &amp; Blackwell and Sharwood's persisting to the present. British traders introduced the powder to Meiji era Japan, in the mid-19th century, where it became known as Japanese curry.\nTypes.\nThere are many varieties of curry. The choice of spices for each dish in traditional cuisine depends on regional cultural traditions and personal preferences. Such dishes have names such as dopiaza and rogan josh that refer to their ingredients, spicing, and cooking methods. Outside the Indian subcontinent, a curry is a dish from Southeast Asia which uses coconut milk and spice pastes, and is commonly eaten over rice. Curries may contain fish, meat, poultry, or shellfish, either alone or in combination with vegetables. Others are vegetarian. A masala mixture is a combination of dried or dry-roasted spices commonly homemade for some curries.\nDry curries are cooked using small amounts of liquid, which is allowed to evaporate, leaving the other ingredients coated with the spice mixture. Wet curries contain significant amounts of sauce or gravy based on broth, coconut cream or coconut milk, dairy cream or yogurt, or legume pur\u00e9e, saut\u00e9ed crushed onion, or tomato pur\u00e9e. Curry powder, a commercially prepared mixture of spices marketed in the West, was first exported to Britain in the 18th century when Indian merchants sold a concoction of spices, similar to garam masala, to the British East India Company returning to Britain.\nBy region.\nUnited Kingdom.\nCurry is very popular in the United Kingdom, with a curry house in nearly every town. Such is its popularity that it has frequently been called its \"adopted national dish\". It was estimated that in 2016 there were 12,000 curry houses, employing 100,000 people and with annual combined sales of approximately \u00a34.2\u00a0billion. The food offered is cooked to British taste, but with increasing demand for authentic Indian styles. In 2001, chicken tikka masala was described by the British foreign secretary Robin Cook as \"a true British national dish, not only because it is the most popular, but because it is a perfect illustration of the way Britain absorbs and adapts external influences.\" Its origin is not certain, but many sources attribute it to British Asians; some cite Glasgow as the city of origin. It may derive from butter chicken, popular in the north of India.\nCurries in Britain are derived partly from India and partly from invention in local Indian restaurants. They vary from mildly-spiced to extremely hot, with names that are to an extent standardised across the country, but are often unknown in India.\nSouth Asia.\nMany Indian dishes are spicy. The spices chosen for a dish are freshly ground and then fried in hot oil or ghee to create a paste. \nThe content of the dish and style of preparation vary by region. The sauces are made with spices including black pepper, cardamom, chili peppers, cinnamon, cloves, coriander, cumin, fennel seed, mustard seed, and turmeric. As many as 15 spices may be used for a meat curry. The spices are sometimes fried whole, sometimes roasted, sometimes ground and mixed into a paste. The sauces are eaten with steamed rice or idli rice cakes in south India, and breads such as chapatis, roti, and naan in the north. \nThe popular rogan josh, for example, from Kashmiri cuisine, is a wet dish of lamb with a red gravy coloured by Kashmiri chillies and an extract of the red flowers of the cockscomb plant (\"mawal\"). Rice and curry is the staple dish of Sri Lanka.\nEast Asia.\nJapanese curry is usually eaten as \u2013 curry, rice, and often pickled vegetables, served on the same plate and eaten with a spoon, a common lunchtime canteen dish. It is less spicy and seasoned than Indian and Southeast Asian curries, being more of a thick stew than a curry. British people brought curry from the Indian colony back to Britain and introduced it to Japan during the Meiji period (1868 to 1912), after Japan ended its policy of national self-isolation (), and curry in Japan was categorised as a Western dish. Its spread across the country is attributed to its use in the Japanese Army and Navy which adopted it extensively as convenient field and naval canteen cooking, allowing even conscripts from the remotest countryside to experience the dish. The Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force traditionally have curry every Friday for lunch and many ships have their own recipes. The standard Japanese curry contains onions, carrots, potatoes, and sometimes celery, and a meat that is cooked in a large pot. Sometimes grated apples or honey are added for additional sweetness and other vegetables are sometimes used instead.\nCurry spread to other regions of Asia. Curry powder is added to some dishes in the southern part of China. The curry powder sold in Chinese grocery stores is similar to Madras curry powder, but with the addition of star anise and cinnamon. The former Portuguese colony of Macau has its own culinary traditions and curry dishes, including \"Galinha \u00e0 portuguesa\" (\"Portuguese-style chicken\") and curry crab. Portuguese sauce is a sauce flavoured with curry and thickened with coconut milk.\nCurry was popularized in Korean cuisine when Ottogi entered the Korean food industry with an imported curry powder in 1969. Korean curry powder contains spices including cardamom, chili, cinnamon, and turmeric.\nCurry \"tteokbokki\" is made of \"tteok\" (rice cakes), \"eomuk\" (fish cakes), eggs, vegetables, and \"gochujang\", fermented red chili paste. As in India, chilis were brought to Korea by European traders. Spicy chili sauce then replaced the soy sauce formerly used in \"tteokbokki\".\nSoutheast Asia.\nIn Burmese cuisine, curries are broadly called \"hin\". Burmese curries contains meat simmered in a curry paste containing onion, garlic, shrimp paste, tomato, and turmeric. Burmese curries are often mild, without chili, and somewhat oily.\nThai curries are called , and usually consist of meat, fish or vegetables in a sauce based on a paste made from chilies, onions or shallots, garlic, and shrimp paste. A few stir-fried Thai dishes use , an Indian style curry powder. In the West, Thai curries are often colour-coded green, yellow, and red, with green usually the mildest, red the hottest. Green curry is flavoured with green chili, coriander, kaffir lime, and basil; yellow, with yellow chili and turmeric; and red, with red chili.\nMalaysian Indian cuisine adapted curries (such as , with coconut milk) via the region's Indian population, but it has become a staple among the Malay and Chinese populations there. Malaysian curries have many varieties, but are often flavoured with cumin, cinnamon, turmeric, coconut milk, shallots, chili peppers, and garlic.\nIndian Indonesian cuisine consists of adaptations of authentic dishes from India, as well as original creations inspired by the diverse food culture of Indonesia. Curry in Indonesian is \"kari\" and in Javanese, \"kare\". In Indonesian cuisine especially in Bandung, there is a dish called \"lontong kari\", a combined of lontong and beef yellow curry soup. In Javanese cuisine, \"kare rajungan\", blue swimmer crab curry has become a delicacy of Tuban Regency, East Java.\nIn Vietnamese cuisine, influenced by both Thai and Indian cooking, curry is known as \"c\u00e0 ri\". It is made with coconut milk, Madras curry powder with plenty of turmeric, and a variety of fresh ingredients such as coriander, lemongrass, and ginger.\nIn the Philippines, a dish that may have been directly inspired by Indian curries is the oxtail stew , possibly influenced by Sepoy expatriates during the brief British occupation of Manila (1762\u20131764), or indirectly via Southeast Asian spicy dishes. are native dishes using coconut milk, which as in the case of Filipino chicken curry can be called 'curries' when curry powder is added.\nSouth Africa.\nCurry spread to South Africa with the migration of people from the Indian subcontinent to the region in the colonial era. African curries, Cape Malay curries and Natal curries include the traditional Natal curry, the Durban curry, Bunny chow, and roti rolls. South African curries appear to have been created in both KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape, while others developed across the country over the late 20th and early 21st centuries to include ekasi, coloured, and Afrikaner varieties. Durban has the largest population of Indians outside of India in the world. Bunny chow or a \"set\", a South African standard, consists of either lamb, chicken or bean curry poured into a tunnelled-out loaf of bread to be eaten with one's fingers by dipping pieces of the bread into it. 'Bunny chow' means 'Indian food', from Banian, an Indian. The method of serving the curry was created because apartheid forbade black people from eating in Indian restaurants; the loaves could speedily be taken away and eaten in the street."}
{"id": "6598", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6598", "title": "Camel", "text": "A camel (from and () from Ancient Semitic: \"g\u0101m\u0101l\") is an even-toed ungulate in the genus Camelus that bears distinctive fatty deposits known as \"humps\" on its back. Camels have long been domesticated and, as livestock, they provide food (camel milk and meat) and textiles (fiber and felt from camel hair). Camels are working animals especially suited to their desert habitat and are a vital means of transport for passengers and cargo. There are three surviving species of camel. The one-humped dromedary makes up 94% of the world's camel population, and the two-humped Bactrian camel makes up 6%. The wild Bactrian camel is a distinct species that is not ancestral to the domestic Bactrian camel, and is now critically endangered, with fewer than 1,000 individuals.\nThe word \"camel\" is also used informally in a wider sense, where the more correct term is \"camelid\", to include all seven species of the family Camelidae: the true camels (the above three species), along with the \"New World\" camelids: the llama, the alpaca, the guanaco, and the vicu\u00f1a, which belong to the separate tribe Lamini. Camelids originated in North America during the Eocene, with the ancestor of modern camels, \"Paracamelus\", migrating across the Bering land bridge into Asia during the late Miocene, around 6 million years ago.\nTaxonomy.\nExtant species.\nThree species are extant:\nBiology.\nThe average life expectancy of a camel is 40 to 50 years. A full-grown adult dromedary camel stands at the shoulder and at the hump. Bactrian camels can be a foot taller. Camels can run at up to in short bursts and sustain speeds of up to . Bactrian camels weigh and dromedaries . The widening toes on a camel's hoof provide supplemental grip for varying soil sediments.\nThe male dromedary camel has an organ called a \"dulla\" in his throat, a large, inflatable sac that he extrudes from his mouth when in rut to assert dominance and attract females. It resembles a long, swollen, pink tongue hanging out of the side of the camel's mouth. Camels mate by having both male and female sitting on the ground, with the male mounting from behind. The male usually ejaculates three or four times within a single mating session. Camelids are the only ungulates to mate in a sitting position.\nEcological and behavioral adaptations.\nCamels do not directly store water in their humps; they are reservoirs of fatty tissue. When this tissue is metabolized, it yields a greater mass of water than that of the fat processed. This fat metabolization, while releasing energy, causes water to evaporate from the lungs during respiration (as oxygen is required for the metabolic process): overall, there is a net decrease in water.\nCamels have a series of physiological adaptations that allow them to withstand long periods of time without any external source of water. The dromedary camel can drink as seldom as once every 10 days even under very hot conditions, and can lose up to 30% of its body mass due to dehydration. Unlike other mammals, camels' red blood cells are oval rather than circular in shape. This facilitates the flow of red blood cells during dehydration and makes them better at withstanding high osmotic variation without rupturing when drinking large amounts of water.\nCamels are able to withstand changes in body temperature and water consumption that would kill most other mammals. Their temperature ranges from at dawn and steadily increases to by sunset, before they cool off at night again. In general, to compare between camels and the other livestock, camels lose only 1.3 liters of fluid intake every day while the other livestock lose 20 to 40 liters per day. Maintaining the brain temperature within certain limits is critical for animals; to assist this, camels have a rete mirabile, a complex of arteries and veins lying very close to each other which utilizes countercurrent blood flow to cool blood flowing to the brain. Camels rarely sweat, even when ambient temperatures reach . Any sweat that does occur evaporates at the skin level rather than at the surface of their coat; the heat of vaporization therefore comes from body heat rather than ambient heat. Camels can withstand losing 25% of their body weight in water, whereas most other mammals can withstand only about 12\u201314% dehydration before cardiac failure results from circulatory disturbance.\nWhen the camel exhales, water vapor becomes trapped in their nostrils and is reabsorbed into the body as a means to conserve water. Camels eating green herbage can ingest sufficient moisture in milder conditions to maintain their bodies' hydrated state without the need for drinking.\nThe camel's thick coat insulates it from the intense heat radiated from desert sand; a shorn camel must sweat 50% more to avoid overheating. During the summer the coat becomes lighter in color, reflecting light as well as helping avoid sunburn. The camel's long legs help by keeping its body farther from the ground, which can heat up to . Dromedaries have a pad of thick tissue over the sternum called the \"pedestal\". When the animal lies down in a sternal recumbent position, the pedestal raises the body from the hot surface and allows cooling air to pass under the body.\nCamels' mouths have a thick leathery lining, allowing them to chew thorny desert plants. Long eyelashes and ear hairs, together with nostrils that can close, form a barrier against sand. If sand gets lodged in their eyes, they can dislodge it using their translucent third eyelid (also known as the nictitating membrane). The camels' gait and widened feet help them move without sinking into the sand.\nThe kidneys and intestines of a camel are very efficient at reabsorbing water. Camels' kidneys have a 1:4 cortex to medulla ratio. Thus, the medullary part of a camel's kidney occupies twice as much area as a cow's kidney. Secondly, renal corpuscles have a smaller diameter, which reduces surface area for filtration. These two major anatomical characteristics enable camels to conserve water and limit the volume of urine in extreme desert conditions. Camel urine comes out as a thick syrup, and camel faeces are so dry that they do not require drying when used to fuel fires.\nThe camel immune system differs from those of other mammals. Normally, the Y-shaped antibody molecules consist of two heavy (or long) chains along the length of the Y, and two light (or short) chains at each tip of the Y. Camels, in addition to these, also have antibodies made of only two heavy chains, a trait that makes them smaller and more durable. These \"heavy-chain-only\" antibodies, discovered in 1993, are thought to have developed 50\u00a0million years ago, after camelids split from ruminants and pigs.\nThe parasite \"Trypanosoma evansi\" causes the disease surra in camels.\nGenetics.\nThe karyotypes of different camelid species have been studied earlier by many groups, but no agreement on chromosome nomenclature of camelids has been reached. A 2007 study flow sorted camel chromosomes, building on the fact that camels have 37 pairs of chromosomes (2n=74), and found that the karyotype consisted of one metacentric, three submetacentric, and 32 acrocentric autosomes. The Y is a small metacentric chromosome, while the X is a large metacentric chromosome.\nThe hybrid camel, a hybrid between Bactrian and dromedary camels, has one hump, though it has an indentation deep that divides the front from the back. The hybrid is at the shoulder and tall at the hump. It weighs an average of and can carry around , which is more than either the dromedary or Bactrian can.\nAccording to molecular data, the wild Bactrian camel (\"C. ferus\") separated from the domestic Bactrian camel (\"C. bactrianus\") about 1 million years ago. New World and Old World camelids diverged about 11 million years ago. In spite of this, these species can hybridize and produce viable offspring. The cama is a camel-llama hybrid bred by scientists to see how closely related the parent species are. Scientists collected semen from a camel via an artificial vagina and inseminated a llama after stimulating ovulation with gonadotrophin injections. The cama is halfway in size between a camel and a llama and lacks a hump. It has ears intermediate between those of camels and llamas, longer legs than the llama, and partially cloven hooves. Like the mule, camas are sterile, despite both parents having the same number of chromosomes.\nEvolution.\nThe earliest known camel, called \"Protylopus\", lived in North America 40 to 50 million years ago (during the Eocene). It was about the size of a rabbit and lived in the open woodlands of what is now South Dakota. By 35 million years ago, the \"Poebrotherium\" was the size of a goat and had many more traits similar to camels and llamas. The hoofed \"Stenomylus\", which walked on the tips of its toes, also existed around this time, and the long-necked \"Aepycamelus\" evolved in the Miocene. The split between the tribes Camelini, which contains modern camels and Lamini, modern llamas, alpacas, vicu\u00f1as, and guanacos, is estimated to have occurred over 16 million years ago.\nThe ancestor of modern camels, \"Paracamelus\", migrated into Eurasia from North America via Beringia during the late Miocene, between 7.5 and 6.5 million years ago. During the Pleistocene, around 3 to 1 million years ago, the North American Camelidae spread to South America as part of the Great American Interchange via the newly formed Isthmus of Panama, where they gave rise to guanacos and related animals. Populations of \"Paracamelus\" continued to exist in the North American Arctic into the Early Pleistocene. This creature is estimated to have stood around tall. The Bactrian camel diverged from the dromedary about 1 million years ago, according to the fossil record.\nThe last camel native to North America was \"Camelops hesternus\", which vanished along with horses, short-faced bears, mammoths and mastodons, ground sloths, sabertooth cats, and many other megafauna as part of the Quaternary extinction event, coinciding with the migration of humans from Asia at the end of the Pleistocene, around 13\u201311,000 years ago.\nAn extinct giant camel species, \"Camelus knoblochi\" roamed Asia during the Late Pleistocene, before becoming extinct around 20,000 years ago.\nDomestication.\nLike horses, camels originated in North America and eventually spread across Beringia to Asia. They survived in the Old World, and eventually humans domesticated them and spread them globally. Along with many other megafauna in North America, the original wild camels were wiped out during the spread of the first indigenous peoples of the Americas from Asia into North America, 10 to 12,000 years ago; although fossils have never been associated with definitive evidence of hunting.\nMost camels surviving today are domesticated. Although feral populations exist in Australia, India and Kazakhstan, wild camels survive only in the wild Bactrian camel population of the Gobi Desert.\nHistory.\nWhen humans first domesticated camels is disputed. Dromedaries may have first been domesticated by humans in Somalia or South Arabia sometime during the 3rd millennium BC, the Bactrian in central Asia around 2,500\u00a0BC, as at Shar-i Sokhta (also known as the Burnt City), Iran. A study from 2016, which genotyped and used world-wide sequencing of modern and ancient mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), suggested that they were initially domesticated in the southeast Arabian Peninsula, with the Bactrian type later being domesticated around Central Asia.\nMartin Heide's 2010 work on the domestication of the camel tentatively concludes that humans had domesticated the Bactrian camel by at least the middle of the third millennium somewhere east of the Zagros Mountains, with the practice then moving into Mesopotamia. Heide suggests that mentions of camels \"in the patriarchal narratives may refer, at least in some places, to the Bactrian camel\", while noting that the camel is not mentioned in relationship to Canaan. Heide and Joris Peters reasserted that conclusion in their 2021 study on the subject.\nIn 2009\u20132013, excavations in the Timna Valley by Lidar Sapir-Hen and Erez Ben-Yosef discovered what may be the earliest domestic camel bones yet found in Israel or even outside the Arabian Peninsula, dating to around 930\u00a0BC. This garnered considerable media coverage, as it is strong evidence that the stories of Abraham, Jacob, Esau, and Joseph were written after this time.\nThe existence of camels in Mesopotamia\u2014but not in the eastern Mediterranean lands\u2014is not a new idea. The historian Richard Bulliet did not think that the occasional mention of camels in the Bible meant that the domestic camels were common in the Holy Land at that time. The archaeologist William F. Albright, writing even earlier, saw camels in the Bible as an anachronism.\nThe official report by Sapir-Hen and Ben-Joseph says:\nThe introduction of the dromedary camel (Camelus dromedarius) as a pack animal to the southern Levant ... substantially facilitated trade across the vast deserts of Arabia, promoting both economic and social change (e.g., Kohler 1984; Borowski 1998: 112\u2013116; Jasmin 2005). This ... has generated extensive discussion regarding the date of the earliest domestic camel in the southern Levant (and beyond) (e.g., Albright 1949: 207; Epstein 1971: 558\u2013584; Bulliet 1975; Zarins 1989; K\u00f6hler-Rollefson 1993; Uerpmann and Uerpmann 2002; Jasmin 2005; 2006; Heide 2010; Rosen and Saidel 2010; Grigson 2012). Most scholars today agree that the dromedary was exploited as a pack animal sometime in the early Iron Age (not before the 12th century [BC])\nand concludes:\nCurrent data from copper smelting sites of the Aravah Valley enable us to pinpoint the introduction of domestic camels to the southern Levant more precisely based on stratigraphic contexts associated with an extensive suite of radiocarbon dates. The data indicate that this event occurred not earlier than the last third of the 10th century [BC] and most probably during this time. The coincidence of this event with a major reorganization of the copper industry of the region\u2014attributed to the results of the campaign of Pharaoh Shoshenq I\u2014raises the possibility that the two were connected, and that camels were introduced as part of the efforts to improve efficiency by facilitating trade.\nTextiles.\nDesert tribes and Mongolian nomads use camel hair for tents, yurts, clothing, bedding and accessories. Camels have outer guard hairs and soft inner down, and the fibers may also be sorted by color and age of the animal. The guard hairs can be felted for use as waterproof coats for the herdsmen, while the softer hair is used for premium goods. The fiber can be spun for use in weaving or made into yarns for hand knitting or crochet. Pure camel hair is recorded as being used for western garments from the 17th century onwards, and from the 19th century a mixture of wool and camel hair was used.\nMilitary uses.\nBy at least 1200\u00a0BC the first camel saddles had appeared, and Bactrian camels could be ridden. The first saddle was positioned to the back of the camel, and control of the Bactrian camel was exercised by means of a stick. However, between 500 and 100\u00a0BC, Bactrian camels came into military use. New saddles, which were inflexible and bent, were put over the humps and divided the rider's weight over the animal. In the seventh century BC the military Arabian saddle evolved, which again improved the saddle design slightly.\nMilitary forces have used camel cavalries in wars throughout Africa, the Middle East, and their use continues into the modern-day within the Border Security Force (BSF) of India. The first documented use of camel cavalries occurred in the Battle of Qarqar in 853\u00a0BC. Armies have also used camels as freight animals instead of horses and mules.\nThe East Roman Empire used auxiliary forces known as \"dromedarii\", whom the Romans recruited in desert provinces. The camels were used mostly in combat because of their ability to scare off horses at close range (horses are afraid of the camels' scent), a quality famously employed by the Achaemenid Persians when fighting Lydia in the Battle of Thymbra (547\u00a0BC).\n19th and 20th centuries.\nThe United States Army established the U.S. Camel Corps, stationed in California, in the 19th century. One may still see stables at the Benicia Arsenal in Benicia, California, where they nowadays serve as the Benicia Historical Museum. Though the experimental use of camels was seen as a success (John B. Floyd, Secretary of War in 1858, recommended that funds be allocated towards obtaining a thousand more camels), the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 saw the end of the Camel Corps: Texas became part of the Confederacy, and most of the camels were left to wander away into the desert.\nFrance created a \"m\u00e9hariste\" camel corps in 1912 as part of the Arm\u00e9e d'Afrique in the Sahara in order to exercise greater control over the camel-riding Tuareg and Arab insurgents, as previous efforts to defeat them on foot had failed. The Free French Camel Corps fought during World War II, and camel-mounted units remained in service until the end of French rule over Algeria in 1962.\nIn 1916, the British created the Imperial Camel Corps. It was originally used to fight the Senussi, but was later used in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign in World War I. The Imperial Camel Corps comprised infantrymen mounted on camels for movement across desert, though they dismounted at battle sites and fought on foot. After July 1918, the Corps began to become run down, receiving no new reinforcements, and was formally disbanded in 1919.\nIn World War I, the British Army also created the Egyptian Camel Transport Corps, which consisted of a group of Egyptian camel drivers and their camels. The Corps supported British war operations in Sinai, Palestine, and Syria by transporting supplies to the troops.\nThe Somaliland Camel Corps was created by colonial authorities in British Somaliland in 1912; it was disbanded in 1944.\nBactrian camels were used by Romanian forces during World War II in the Caucasian region. At the same period the Soviet units operating around Astrakhan in 1942 adopted local camels as draft animals due to shortage of trucks and horses, and kept them even after moving out of the area. Despite severe losses, some of these camels ended up as far west as to Berlin itself.\nThe Bikaner Camel Corps of British India fought alongside the British Indian Army in World Wars I and II.\nThe \"Tropas N\u00f3madas\" (Nomad Troops) were an auxiliary regiment of Sahrawi tribesmen serving in the colonial army in Spanish Sahara (today Western Sahara). Operational from the 1930s until the end of the Spanish presence in the territory in 1975, the \"Tropas N\u00f3madas\" were equipped with small arms and led by Spanish officers. The unit guarded outposts and sometimes conducted patrols on camelback.\n21st century competition.\nThe annual King Abdulaziz Camel Festival is held in Saudi Arabia. In addition to camel racing and camel milk tasting, the festival holds a camel \"beauty pageant\" with prize money of $57m (\u00a340m). In 2018, 12 camels were disqualified from the beauty contest after their owners were found to have injected them with botox. In a similar incident in 2021, over 40 camels were disqualified.\nFood uses.\nCamel meat and milk are foods that are found in many cuisines, typically in Middle Eastern, North African and some Australian cuisines. Camels provide food in the form of meat and milk.\nDairy.\nCamel milk is a staple food of desert nomad tribes and is sometimes considered a meal itself; a nomad can live on only camel milk for almost a month.\nCamel milk can readily be made into yogurt, but can only be made into butter if it is soured first, churned, and a clarifying agent is then added. Until recently, camel milk could not be made into camel cheese because rennet was unable to coagulate the milk proteins to allow the collection of curds. Developing less wasteful uses of the milk, the FAO commissioned Professor J.P. Ramet of the \u00c9cole Nationale Sup\u00e9rieure d'Agronomie et des Industries Alimentaires, who was able to produce curdling by the addition of calcium phosphate and vegetable rennet in the 1990s. The cheese produced from this process has low levels of cholesterol and is easy to digest, even for the lactose intolerant.\nCamel milk can also be made into ice cream.\nMeat.\nApproximately 3.3 million camels and camelids are slaughtered each year for meat worldwide. A camel carcass can provide a substantial amount of meat. The male dromedary carcass can weigh , while the carcass of a male Bactrian can weigh up to . The carcass of a female dromedary weighs less than the male, ranging between . The brisket, ribs and loin are among the preferred parts, and the hump is considered a delicacy. The hump contains \"white and sickly fat\", which can be used to make the \"khli\" (preserved meat) of mutton, beef, or camel. On the other hand, camel milk and meat are rich in protein, vitamins, glycogen, and other nutrients making them essential in the diet of many people. From chemical composition to meat quality, the dromedary camel is the preferred breed for meat production. It does well even in arid areas due to its unusual physiological behaviors and characteristics, which include tolerance to extreme temperatures, radiation from the sun, water paucity, rugged landscape and low vegetation. Camel meat is reported to taste like coarse beef, but older camels can prove to be very tough, although camel meat becomes tenderer the more it is cooked.\nCamel is one of the animals that can be ritually slaughtered and divided into three portions (one for the home, one for extended family/social networks, and one for those who cannot afford to slaughter an animal themselves) for the qurban of Eid al-Adha.\nThe Abu Dhabi Officers' Club serves a camel burger mixed with beef or lamb fat in order to improve the texture and taste. In Karachi, Pakistan, some restaurants prepare nihari from camel meat. Specialist camel butchers provide expert cuts, with the hump considered the most popular.\nCamel meat has been eaten for centuries. It has been recorded by ancient Greek writers as an available dish at banquets in ancient Persia, usually roasted whole. The Roman emperor Heliogabalus enjoyed camel's heel. Camel meat is mainly eaten in certain regions, including Eritrea, Somalia, Djibouti, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Syria, Libya, Sudan, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, and other arid regions where alternative forms of protein may be limited or where camel meat has had a long cultural history. Camel blood is also consumable, as is the case among pastoralists in northern Kenya, where camel blood is drunk with milk and acts as a key source of iron, vitamin D, salts and minerals.\nA 2005 report issued jointly by the Saudi Ministry of Health and the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention details four cases of human bubonic plague resulting from the ingestion of raw camel liver.\nCamel meat is also occasionally found in Australian cuisine: for example, a camel lasagna is available in Alice Springs. Australia has exported camel meat, primarily to the Middle East but also to Europe and the US, for many years. The meat is very popular among East African Australians, such as Somalis, and other Australians have also been buying it. The feral nature of the animals means they produce a different type of meat to farmed camels in other parts of the world, and it is sought after because it is disease-free, and a unique genetic group. Demand is outstripping supply, and governments are being urged not to cull the camels, but redirect the cost of the cull into developing the market. Australia has seven camel dairies, which produce milk, cheese and skincare products in addition to meat.\nReligion.\nIslam.\nMuslims consider camel meat \"halal\" (, 'allowed'). However, according to some Islamic schools of thought, a state of impurity is brought on by the consumption of it. Consequently, these schools hold that Muslims must perform \"wudhu\" (ablution) before the next time they pray after eating camel meat. Also, some Islamic schools of thought consider it \"haram\" (, 'forbidden') for a Muslim to perform \"Salat\" in places where camels lie, as it is said to be a dwelling place of the \"Shaytan\" (, 'Devil'). According to Abu Yusuf (d.798), the urine of camels may be used for medical treatment if necessary, but according to Ab\u016b \u1e24an\u012bfah, the drinking of camel urine is discouraged.\nIslamic texts contain several stories featuring camels. In the story of the people of Thamud, the prophet Salih miraculously brings forth a \"naqat\" (, 'milch-camel') out of a rock. After Muhammad migrated from Mecca to Medina (the Hijrah), he allowed his she-camel to roam there; the location where the camel stopped to rest determined the location where he would build his house in Medina.\nJudaism.\nAccording to Jewish tradition, camel meat and milk are not kosher. Camels possess only one of the two kosher criteria; although they chew their cud, they do not have cloven hooves: \"But these you shall not eat among those that bring up the cud and those that have a cloven hoof: the camel, because it brings up its cud, but does not have a [completely] cloven hoof; it is unclean for you.\"\nThe Palestinian Muslim Makhamara clan in Yatta, who claim descent from Jews, reportedly avoid eating camel meat, a practice cited as evidence of their Jewish origins.\nCultural depictions.\nWhat may be the oldest carvings of camels were discovered in 2018 in Saudi Arabia. They were analysed by researchers from several scientific disciplines and, in 2021, were estimated to be 7,000 to 8,000 years old. The dating of rock art is made difficult by the lack of organic material in the carvings that may be tested, so the researchers attempting to date them tested animal bones found associated with the carvings, assessed erosion patterns, and analysed tool marks in order to determine a correct date for the creation of the sculptures. This Neolithic dating would make the carvings significantly older than Stonehenge (5,000 years old) and the Egyptian pyramids at Giza (4,500 years old) and it predates estimates for the domestication of camels.\nDistribution and numbers.\nThere are approximately 14 million camels alive , with 90% being dromedaries. Dromedaries alive today are domesticated animals (mostly living in the Horn of Africa, the Sahel, Maghreb, Middle East and South Asia). The Horn region alone has the largest concentration of camels in the world, where the dromedaries constitute an important part of local nomadic life. They provide nomadic people in Somalia and Ethiopia with milk, food, and transportation.\nOver one million dromedary camels are estimated to be feral in Australia, descended from those introduced as a method of transport in the 19th and early 20th centuries. This population is growing about 8% per year; it was estimated at 700,000 in 2008. Representatives of the Australian government have culled more than 100,000 of the animals in part because the camels use too much of the limited resources needed by sheep farmers.\nA small population of introduced camels, dromedaries and Bactrians, wandered through Southwestern United States after having been imported in the 19th century as part of the U.S. Camel Corps experiment. When the project ended, they were used as draft animals in mines and escaped or were released. Twenty-five U.S. camels were bought and exported to Canada during the Cariboo Gold Rush.\nThe Bactrian camel is, , reduced to an estimated 1.4\u00a0million animals, most of which are domesticated. The Wild Bactrian camel is the only truly wild (as opposed to feral) camel in the world. It is a distinct species that is not ancestral to the domestic Bactrian camel. The wild camels are critically endangered and number approximately 950, inhabiting the Gobi and Taklamakan Deserts in China and Mongolia.\nReferences.\nNotes\nBibliography\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "6599", "revid": "6587933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6599", "title": "Chaldea", "text": "Chaldea () was a small country that existed between the late 10th or early 9th and mid-6th centuries BC, after which the country and its people were absorbed and assimilated into the indigenous population of Babylonia. Semitic-speaking, it was located in the marshy land of the far southeastern corner of Mesopotamia and briefly came to rule Babylon. The Hebrew Bible uses the term (\"Ka\u015bdim\") and this is translated as \"Chaldaeans\" in the Greek Old Testament.\nDuring a period of weakness in the East Semitic-speaking kingdom of Babylonia, new tribes of West Semitic-speaking migrants arrived in the region from the Levant between the 11th and 9th centuries BC. The earliest waves consisted of Suteans and Arameans, followed a century or so later by the Kaldu, a group who became known later as the Chaldeans or the Chaldees. These migrations did not affect the powerful kingdom and empire of Assyria in Upper Mesopotamia, which repelled these incursions.\nThese nomadic Chaldeans settled in the far southeastern portion of Babylonia, chiefly on the left bank of the Euphrates. Though for a short time the name commonly referred to the whole of southern Mesopotamia in Hebraic literature, this was a geographical and historical misnomer as Chaldea proper was in fact only the plain in the far southeast formed by the deposits of the Euphrates and the Tigris, extending about along the course of these rivers and averaging about in width.\n There were several kings of Chaldean origins who ruled Babylonia. From 626 BC to 539 BC, a ruling family referred to as the Chaldean dynasty, named after their possible Chaldean origin, ruled the kingdom at its height under the Neo-Babylonian Empire, although the final ruler of this empire, Nabonidus (556\u2013539 BC) (and his son and regent Belshazzar) was a usurper of Assyrian ancestry.\nName.\nThe name \"Chaldaea\" is a latinization of the Greek ' (), a hellenization of Akkadian ' or ', suggesting an underlying /ka\u026cdu/. The term \"Chaldea\" appears in Hebrew in the Bible as ' (), while \"Chaldeans\" are Hebrew ' () and Aramaic ' ().\nGenesis 22:22 lists \"Kesed\" (\u05db\u05b6\u05bc\u05e9\u05b6\u05c2\u05d3, reconstructed /ka\u026cd/), perhaps a singular form of \"Kasdim\", as son of Abraham's brother Nahor (and brother of Kemuel the father of Aram), residing in Aram Naharaim. Jubilees 11:7 claims that \"Ur son of Kesed built the city of Ur-Kasdim, and he named it after himself and his father\". \nJewish historian Flavius Josephus (37\u2013) links Arpachshad and Chaldaea in his \"Antiquities of the Jews\": \"Arphaxad named the Arphaxadites, who are now called Chaldeans.\" Umberto Cassuto suggests that that the name \"Arpachshad\" (\u05d0\u05e8\u05e4\u05db\u05e9\u05d3) may be compounded from Arapcha-Kesed.\nLand.\nIn the early period, between the early 9th century and late 7th century BC, \"mat Kaldi\" was the name of a small sporadically independent migrant-founded territory under the domination of the Neo-Assyrian Empire (911\u2013605 BC) in southeastern Babylonia, extending to the western shores of the Persian Gulf.\nThe expression \" mat Bit Y\u00e2kin\" is also used, apparently synonymously. \"Bit Y\u00e2kin\" was the name of the largest and most powerful of the five tribes of the Chaldeans, or equivalently, their territory.\nThe original extension of \"Bit Y\u00e2kin\" is not known precisely, but it extended from the lower Tigris into the Arabian Peninsula. Sargon II mentions it as extending as far as Dilmun or \"sea-land\" (littoral Eastern Arabia). \"Chaldea\" or \"mat Kaldi\" generally referred to the low, marshy, alluvial land around the estuaries of the Tigris and Euphrates, which at the time discharged their waters through separate mouths into the sea.\nThe tribal capital \"Dur Y\u00e2kin\" was the original seat of Marduk-Baladan.\nThe king of Chaldea was also called the king of Bit Yakin, just as the kings of Babylonia and Assyria were regularly styled simply king of Babylon or Assur, the capital city in each case. In the same way, what is now known as the Persian Gulf was sometimes called \"the Sea of Bit Yakin\", and sometimes \"the Sea of the Land of Chaldea\".\n\"Chaldea\" came to be used in a wider sense, of Southern Mesopotamia in general, following the brief ascendancy of the Chaldeans during 608\u2013557 BC. This is especially the case in the Hebrew Bible, which was substantially composed during this period (roughly corresponding to the period of Babylonian captivity). The Book of Jeremiah makes frequent reference to the Chaldeans (King James Version \"Chaldees\" following LXX ; in Biblical Hebrew as \"Kasd\u00eem\" ). \nBook of Habakkuk 1:6 calls them \"that bitter and hasty nation\" (). Book of Isaiah 23:13 DRB states, \u201cBehold the land of the Chaldeans, there was not such a people, the Assyrians founded it: they have led away the strong ones thereof into captivity, they have destroyed the houses thereof, they have brought it to ruin.\u201d\nAncient Chaldeans.\nUnlike the East Semitic Akkadian-speaking Akkadians, Assyrians and Babylonians, whose ancestors had been established in Mesopotamia since at least the 30th century BC, the Chaldeans were not a native Mesopotamian people, but were late 10th- or early 9th-century BC West Semitic Levantine migrants to the southeastern corner of the region, who had played no part in the previous three millennia of Sumero-Akkadian and Assyro-Babylonian Mesopotamian civilization and history.\nThe ancient Chaldeans seem to have migrated into Mesopotamia sometime between c. 940 and 860 BC, a century or so after other new Semitic arrivals, the Arameans and the Suteans, appeared in Babylonia, c. 1100 BC. According to Ran Zadok, they first appear in written record in cylinder inscriptions of the King of Mari A\u0161\u0161ur-ketta-l\u0113\u0161ir II (late 12th-early 11th century BC), which record them reaching Mesopotamia as early as the 11th century BC. They later appear in the annals of the Assyrian king Shalmaneser III during the 850s BC. This was a period of weakness in Babylonia, and its ineffectual native kings were unable to prevent new waves of semi-nomadic foreign peoples from invading and settling in the land.\nThough belonging to the same West Semitic speaking ethnic group and migrating from the same Levantine regions as the earlier arriving Aramaeans, they are to be differentiated; the Assyrian king Sennacherib, for example, carefully distinguishes them in his inscriptions.\nThe Chaldeans were for a time able to keep their identity despite the dominant native Assyro-Babylonian (Sumero-Akkadian-derived) culture although, as was the case for the earlier Amorites, Kassites and Suteans before them, by the time Babylon fell in 539 BC, perhaps before, the Chaldeans ceased to exist as a specific ethnic group.\nIn the Hebrew Bible, \"Ur of the Chaldees\" (Ur Ka\u015bdim) is cited as the starting point of the patriarch Abraham's journey to Canaan.\nLanguage.\nAncient Chaldeans originally spoke a West Semitic language similar to Old Aramaic. During the Neo-Assyrian Empire, Imperial Aramaic became the lingua franca of the empire under the rule of the Assyrian king Tiglath-Pileser III in the mid-8th century BC. As a result, in late periods both the Babylonian and Assyrian dialects of Akkadian became marginalized, and Aramaic took its place across Mesopotamia, including among the Chaldeans, and later, also the southern Levant. One form of this once widespread Aramaic language was used in some books of the Hebrew Bible (the Book of Daniel and the Book of Ezra). The use of the name \"Chaldean\" (Chaldaic, Chaldee) to describe it, first introduced by Jerome of Stridon (d. 420), became common in early Aramaic studies, but that misnomer was later corrected, when modern scholars concluded that the Aramaic dialect used in the Hebrew Bible was not closely related to the ancient Chaldean language.\nReligion.\nAncient Chaldeans believed in \"three heavens\".\nHistory.\nThe region that the Chaldeans eventually made their homeland was in relatively poor southeastern Mesopotamia, at the head of the Persian Gulf. They appear to have migrated into southern Babylonia from the Levant at some unknown point between the end of the reign of Ninurta-kudurri-usur II (a contemporary of Tiglath-Pileser II) circa 940 BC, and the start of the reign of Marduk-zakir-shumi I in 855 BC, although there is no historical proof of their existence prior to the late 850s BC.\nFor perhaps a century or so after settling in the area, these semi-nomadic migrant Chaldean tribes had no impact on the pages of history, seemingly remaining subjugated by the native Akkadian speaking kings of Babylon or by perhaps regionally influential Aramean tribes. The main players in southern Mesopotamia during this period were Babylonia and Assyria, together with Elam to the east and the Aramaeans, who had already settled in the region a century or so prior to the arrival of the Chaldeans.\nThe very first written historical attestation of the existence of Chaldeans occurs in 852 BC, in the annals of the Assyrian king Shalmaneser III, who mentions invading the southeastern extremes of Babylonia and subjugating one Mushallim-Marduk, the chief of the Amukani tribe and overall leader of the Kaldu tribes, together with capturing the town of Baqani, extracting tribute from Adini, chief of the Bet-Dakkuri, another Chaldean tribe.\nShalmaneser III had invaded Babylonia at the request of its own king, Marduk-zakir-shumi I, who, being threatened by his own rebellious relations, together with powerful Aramean tribes pleaded with the more powerful Assyrian king for help. The subjugation of the Chaldean tribes by the Assyrian king appears to have been an aside, as they were not at that time a powerful force or a threat to the native Babylonian king.\nImportant Kaldu tribes and their regions in southeastern Babylonia were Bit-Y\u00e2kin (the original area the Chaldeans settled in on the Persian Gulf), Bet-Dakuri, Bet-Adini, Bet-Amukkani, and Bet-Shilani.\nChaldean leaders had by this time already adopted Assyro-Babylonian names, religion, language, and customs, indicating that they had become Akkadianized to a great degree.\nThe Chaldeans remained quietly ruled by the native Babylonians (who were in turn subjugated by their Assyrian relations) for the next seventy-two years, only coming to historical prominence for the first time in Babylonia in 780 BC, when a previously unknown Chaldean named Marduk-apla-usur usurped the throne from the native Babylonian king Marduk-bel-zeri (790\u2013780 BC). The latter was a vassal of the Assyrian king Shalmaneser IV (783\u2013773 BC), who was otherwise occupied quelling a civil war in Assyria at the time.\nThis was to set a precedent for all future Chaldean aspirations on Babylon during the Neo-Assyrian Empire; always too weak to confront a strong Assyria alone and directly, the Chaldeans awaited periods when Assyrian kings were distracted elsewhere in their vast empire, or engaged in internal conflicts, then, in alliance with other powers stronger than themselves (usually Elam), they made a bid for control over Babylonia.\nShalmaneser IV attacked and defeated Marduk-apla-user, retaking northern Babylonia and forcing on him a border treaty in Assyria's favour. The Assyrians allowed him to remain on the throne, although subject to Assyria. Eriba-Marduk, another Chaldean, succeeded him in 769 BC and his son, Nabu-shuma-ishkun in 761 BC, with both being dominated by the new Assyrian king Ashur-Dan III (772\u2013755 BC). Babylonia appears to have been in a state of chaos during this time, with the north occupied by Assyria, its throne occupied by foreign Chaldeans, and continual civil unrest throughout the land.\nThe Chaldean rule proved short-lived. A native Babylonian king named Nabonassar (748\u2013734 BC) defeated and overthrew the Chaldean usurpers in 748 BC, restored indigenous rule, and successfully stabilised Babylonia. The Chaldeans once more faded into obscurity for the next three decades. During this time both the Babylonians and the Chaldean and Aramean migrant groups who had settled in the land once more fell completely under the yoke of the powerful Assyrian king Tiglath-Pileser III (745\u2013727 BC), a ruler who introduced Imperial Aramaic as the lingua franca of the empire. The Assyrian king at first made Nabonassar and his successor native Babylonian kings Nabu-nadin-zeri, Nabu-suma-ukin II and Nabu-mukin-zeri his subjects, but decided to rule Babylonia directly from 729 BC. He was followed by Shalmaneser V (727\u2013722 BC), who also ruled Babylon in person.\nWhen Sargon II (722\u2013705 BC) ascended the throne of the Assyrian Empire in 722 BC after the death of Shalmaneser V, he was forced to launch a major campaign in his subject states of Persia, Mannea and Media in Ancient Iran to defend his territories there. He defeated and drove out the Scythians and Cimmerians who had attacked Assyria's Persian and Median vassal colonies in the region. At the same time, Egypt began encouraging and supporting the rebellion against Assyria in Israel and Canaan, forcing the Assyrians to send troops to deal with the Egyptians.\nThese events allowed the Chaldeans to once more attempt to assert themselves. While the Assyrian king was otherwise occupied defending his Iranian colonies from the Scythians and Cimmerians and driving the Egyptians from Canaan, Marduk-apla-iddina II (the Biblical Merodach-Baladan) of Bit-Y\u00e2kin, allied himself with the powerful Elamite kingdom and the native Babylonians, briefly seizing control of Babylon between 721 and 710 BC. With the Scythians and Cimmerians vanquished, the Medes and Persians pledging loyalty, and the Egyptians defeated and ejected from southern Canaan, Sargon II was free at last to deal with the Chaldeans, Babylonians, and Elamites. He attacked and deposed Marduk-apla-adding II in 710 BC, also defeating his Elamite allies in the process. After defeat by the Assyrians, Merodach-Baladan fled to his protectors in Elam\nIn 703, Merodach-Baladan very briefly regained the throne from a native Akkadian-Babylonian ruler Marduk-zakir-shumi II, who was a puppet of the new Assyrian king, Sennacherib (705\u2013681 BC). He was once more soundly defeated at Kish, and once again fled to Elam where he died in exile after one final failed attempt to raise a revolt against Assyria in 700 BC, this time not in Babylon, but in the Chaldean tribal land of Bit-Y\u00e2kin. A native Babylonian king named Bel-ibni (703\u2013701 BC) was placed on the throne as a puppet of Assyria.\nThe next challenge to Assyrian domination came from the Elamites in 694 BC, with Nergal-ushezib deposing and murdering Ashur-nadin-shumi (700\u2013694 BC), the Assyrian prince who was king of Babylon and son of Sennacherib. The Chaldeans and Babylonians again allied with their more powerful Elamite neighbors in this endeavour. This prompted the enraged Assyrian king Sennacherib to invade and subjugate Elam and Chaldea and to sack Babylon, laying waste to and largely destroying the city. Babylon was regarded as a sacred city by all Mesopotamians, including the Assyrians, and this act eventually resulted in Sennacherib's being murdered by his own sons while he was praying to the god Nisroch in Nineveh.\nEsarhaddon (681\u2013669 BC) succeeded Sennacherib as ruler of the Assyrian Empire. He completely rebuilt Babylon and brought peace to the region. He conquered Egypt, Nubia and Libya and entrenched his mastery over the Persians, Medes, Parthians, Scythians, Cimmerians, Arameans, Israelites, Phoenicians, Canaanites, Urartians, Pontic Greeks, Cilicians, Phrygians, Lydians, Manneans and Arabs. For the next 60 or so years, Babylon and Chaldea remained peacefully under direct Assyrian control. The Chaldeans remained subjugated and quiet during this period, and the next major revolt in Babylon against the Assyrian empire was fermented not by a Chaldean, Babylonian or Elamite, but by Shamash-shum-ukin, who was an Assyrian king of Babylon, and elder brother of Ashurbanipal (668\u2013627 BC), the new ruler of the Neo-Assyrian Empire.\nShamash-shum-ukin (668\u2013648 BC) had become infused with Babylonian nationalism after sixteen years peacefully subject to his brother, and despite being Assyrian himself, declared that the city of Babylon and not Nineveh or Assur should be the seat of the empire.\nIn 652 BC, he raised a powerful coalition of peoples resentful of their subjugation to Assyria against his own brother Ashurbanipal. The alliance included the Babylonians, Persians, Chaldeans, Medes, Elamites, Sultans, Arameans, Israelites, Arabs and Canaanites, together with some disaffected elements among the Assyrians themselves. After a bitter struggle lasting five years, the Assyrian king triumphed over his rebellious brother in 648 BC, Elam was utterly destroyed, and the Babylonians, Persians, Medes, Chaldeans, Arabs, and others were savagely punished. An Assyrian governor named Kandalanu was then placed on the throne of Babylon to rule on behalf of Ashurbanipal. The next 22 years were peaceful, and neither the Babylonians nor Chaldeans posed a threat to the dominance of Ashurbanipal.\nHowever, after the death of the mighty Ashurbanipal (and Kandalanu) in 627 BC, the Neo-Assyrian Empire descended into a series of bitter internal dynastic civil wars that were to be the cause of its downfall.\nAshur-etil-ilani (626\u2013623 BC) ascended to the throne of the empire in 626 BC but was immediately engulfed in a torrent of fierce rebellions instigated by rival claimants. He was deposed in 623 BC by an Assyrian general (\"turtanu\") named Sin-shumu-lishir (623\u2013622 BC), who was also declared king of Babylon. Sin-shar-ishkun (622\u2013612 BC), the brother of Ashur-etil-ilani, took back the throne of empire from Sin-shumu-lishir in 622 BC, but was then himself faced with unremitting rebellion against his rule by his own people. Continual conflict among the Assyrians led to a myriad of subject peoples, from Cyprus to Persia and The Caucasus to Egypt, quietly reasserting their independence and ceasing to pay tribute to Assyria.\nNabopolassar, a previously obscure and unknown Chaldean chieftain, followed the opportunistic tactics laid down by previous Chaldean leaders to take advantage of the chaos and anarchy gripping Assyria and Babylonia and seized the city of Babylon in 620 BC with the help of its native Babylonian inhabitants.\nSin-shar-ishkun amassed a powerful army and marched into Babylon to regain control of the region. Nabopolassar was saved from likely destruction because yet another massive Assyrian rebellion broke out in Assyria proper, including the capital Nineveh, which forced the Assyrian king to turn back in order to quell the revolt. Nabopolassar took advantage of this situation, seizing the ancient city of Nippur in 619 BC, a mainstay of pro-Assyrianism in Babylonia, and thus Babylonia as a whole.\nHowever, his position was still far from secure, and bitter fighting continued in the Babylonian heartlands from 620 to 615 BC, with Assyrian forces encamped in Babylonia in an attempt to eject Nabopolassar. Nabopolassar attempted a counterattack, marched his army into Assyria proper in 616 BC, and tried to besiege Assur and Arrapha (modern Kirkuk), but was defeated by Sin-shar-ishkun and chased back into Babylonia after being driven from Idiqlat (modern Tikrit) at the southernmost end of Assyria. A stalemate seemed to have ensued, with Nabopolassar unable to make any inroads into Assyria despite its greatly weakened state, and Sin-shar-ishkun unable to eject Nabopolassar from Babylonia due to constant rebellions and civil war among his own people.\nNabopolassar's position, and the fate of the Assyrian empire, was sealed when he entered into an alliance with another of Assyria's former vassals, the Medes, the now dominant people of what was to become Persia. The Median Cyaxares had also recently taken advantage of the anarchy in the Assyrian Empire, while officially still a vassal of Assyria, he took the opportunity to meld the Iranian peoples; the Medes, Persians, Sagartians and Parthians, into a large and powerful Median-dominated force. The Medes, Persians, Parthians, Chaldeans and Babylonians formed an alliance that also included the Scythians and Cimmerians to the north.\nWhile Sin-shar-ishkun was fighting both the rebels in Assyria and the Chaldeans and Babylonians in southern Mesopotamia, Cyaxares (hitherto a vassal of Assyria), in alliance with the Scythians and Cimmerians launched a surprise attack on civil-war-beleaguered Assyria in 615 BC, sacking Kalhu (the Biblical Calah/Nimrud) and taking Arrapkha (modern Kirkuk). Nabopolassar, still pinned down in southern Mesopotamia, was not involved in this major breakthrough against Assyria. From this point however, the alliance of Medes, Persians, Chaldeans, Babylonians, Sagartians, Scythians and Cimmerians fought in unison against Assyria.\nDespite the sorely depleted state of Assyria, bitter fighting ensued. Throughout 614 BC the alliance of powers continued to make inroads into Assyria itself, although in 613 BC the Assyrians somehow rallied to score a number of counterattacking victories over the Medes-Persians, Babylonians-Chaldeans and Scythians-Cimmerians. This led to a coalition of forces ranged against it to unite and launch a massive combined attack in 612 BC, finally besieging and sacking Nineveh in late 612 BC, killing Sin-shar-ishkun in the process.\nA new Assyrian king, Ashur-uballit II (612\u2013605 BC), took the crown amidst the house-to-house fighting in Nineveh, and refused a request to bow in vassalage to the rulers of the alliance. He managed to fight his way out of Nineveh and reach the northern Assyrian city of Harran, where he founded a new capital. Assyria resisted for another seven years until 605 BC, when the remnants of the Assyrian army and the army of the Egyptians, whose 26th Dynasty had formed a brief allied coalition with the Assyrians, were defeated at Karchemish. Nabopolassar and his Median, Scythian and Cimmerian allies were now in possession of much of the huge Neo-Assyrian Empire. The Egyptians had belatedly come to the aid of Assyria, which they would have hoped to support as a secure buffer between Egypt and the new powers of Babylon, Medes and Persians, having already been raided by the Scythians.\nThe Chaldean king of Babylon now ruled all of southern Mesopotamia (Assyria in the north was ruled by the Medes), and the former Assyrian possessions of Aram (Syria), Phoenicia, Israel, Cyprus, Edom, Philistia, and parts of Arabia, while the Medes took control of the former Assyrian colonies in Ancient Iran, Asia Minor and the Caucasus.\nNabopolassar was not able to enjoy his success for long, dying in 604 BC, only one year after the victory at Karchemish. He was succeeded by his son, who took the name Nebuchadnezzar II, after the unrelated 12th century BC native Akkadian-Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar I, indicating the extent to which the migrant Chaldeans had become infused with native Mesopotamian culture.\nNebuchadnezzar II and his allies may well have been forced to deal with remnants of Assyrian resistance based in and around Dur-Katlimmu, as Assyrian imperial records continue to be dated in this region between 604 and 599 BC. In addition, the Egyptians remained in the region an attempt to revive the Asian colonies of the ancient Egyptian Empire.\nNebuchadnezzar II was to prove himself to be the greatest of the Chaldean rulers, rivaling another non-native ruler, the 18th century BC Amorite king Hammurabi, as the greatest king of Babylon. He was a patron of the cities and a spectacular builder, rebuilding all of Babylonia's major cities on a lavish scale. His building activity at Babylon, expanding on the earlier major and impressive rebuilding of the Assyrian king Esarhaddon, helped to turn it into the immense and beautiful city of legend. Babylon covered more than , surrounded by moats and ringed by a double circuit of walls. The Euphrates flowed through the center of the city, spanned by a beautiful stone bridge. At the center of the city rose the giant ziggurat called Etemenanki, \"House of the Frontier Between Heaven and Earth,\" which lay next to the Temple of Marduk. He is also believed by many historians to have built The Hanging Gardens of Babylon (although others believe these gardens were built much earlier by an Assyrian king in Nineveh) for his wife, a Median princess from the green mountains, so that she would feel at home.\nA capable leader, Nebuchadnezzar II conducted successful military campaigns; cities like Tyre, Sidon and Damascus were subjugated. He also conducted numerous campaigns in Asia Minor against the Scythians, Cimmerians, and Lydians. Like their Assyrian relations, the Babylonians had to campaign yearly in order to control their colonies.\nIn 601 BC, Nebuchadnezzar II was involved in a major but inconclusive battle against the Egyptians. In 599 BC, he invaded Arabia and routed the Arabs at Qedar. In 597 BC, he invaded Judah, captured Jerusalem after the siege of Jerusalem (597 BC) and deposed its king Jehoiachin, carrying the Israelites into captivity in Babylon. Egyptian and Babylonian armies fought each other for control of the Near East throughout much of Nebuchadnezzar's reign, and this encouraged king Zedekiah of Judah to revolt. After an eighteen-month siege, Jerusalem was captured in 587 BC, thousands of Jews were deported to Babylon, and Solomon's Temple was razed to the ground.\nNebuchadnezzar successfully fought the Pharaohs Psammetichus II and Apries throughout his reign, and during the reign of Pharaoh Amasis in 568 BC it is rumoured that he may have briefly invaded Egypt itself.\nBy 572, Nebuchadnezzar was in full control of Babylonia, Chaldea, Aramea (Syria), Phonecia, Israel, Judah, Philistia, Samarra, Jordan, northern Arabia, and parts of Asia Minor. Nebuchadnezzar died of illness in 562 BC after a one-year co-reign with his son, Amel-Marduk, who was deposed in 560 BC after a reign of only two years.\nEnd of the Chaldean dynasty.\nNeriglissar succeeded Amel-Marduk. It is unclear as to whether he was in fact an ethnic Chaldean or a native Babylonian nobleman, as he was not related by blood to Nabopolassar's descendants, having married into the ruling family. He conducted successful military campaigns against the Hellenic inhabitants of Cilicia, which had threatened Babylonian interests. Neriglissar reigned for only four years and was succeeded by the youthful Labashi-Marduk in 556 BC. Again, it is unclear whether he was a Chaldean or a native Babylonian.\nLabashi-Marduk reigned only for a matter of months, being deposed by Nabonidus in late 556 BC. Nabonidus was certainly not a Chaldean, but an Assyrian from Harran, the last capital of Assyria, and proved to be the final native Mesopotamian king of Babylon. He and his son, the regent Belshazzar, were deposed by the Persians under Cyrus the Great in 539 BC.\nWhen the Babylonian Empire was absorbed into the Persian Achaemenid Empire, the name \"Chaldean\" lost its meaning in reference to a particular ethnicity or land, but lingered for a while as a term solely and explicitly used to describe a societal class of astrologers and astronomers in southern Mesopotamia. The original Chaldean tribe had long ago became Akkadianized, adopting Akkadian culture, religion, language and customs, blending into the majority native population, and eventually wholly disappearing as a distinct race of people, as had been the case with other preceding migrant peoples, such as the Amorites, Kassites, Suteans and Arameans of Babylonia.\nThe Persians considered this \"Chaldean societal class\" to be masters of reading and writing, and especially versed in all forms of incantation, sorcery, witchcraft, and the magical arts. They spoke of astrologists and astronomers as \"Chaldeans\", and it is used with this specific meaning in the Book of Daniel (Dan. i. 4, ii. 2 et seq.) and by classical writers, such as Strabo.\nThe disappearance of the Chaldeans as an ethnicity and Chaldea as a land is evidenced by the fact that the Persian rulers of the Achaemenid Empire (539\u2013330 BC) did not retain a province called \"Chaldea\", nor did they refer to \"Chaldeans\" as a race of people in their written annals. This is in contrast to Assyria, and for a time Babylonia also, where the Persians retained the names Assyria and Babylonia as designations for distinct geo-political entities within the Achaemenid Empire. In the case of the Assyrians in particular, Achaemenid records show Assyrians holding important positions within the empire, particularly with regards to military and civil administration.\nLegacy.\nThe term Chaldean was still in use at the time of Cicero (106\u201343 BC) long after the Chaldeans had disappeared. In one of his speeches he mentioned \"Chaldean astrologers\", and he spoke of them more than once in his \"De Divinatione\". Other classical Latin writers who speak of them as distinguished for their knowledge of astronomy and astrology are Pliny the Elder, Valerius Maximus, Aulus Gellius, Cato the Elder, Lucretius, and Juvenal. Horace in his \"Carpe diem\" ode speaks of the \"Babylonian calculations\" (\"Babylonii numeri\"), the horoscopes of astrologers consulted regarding the future.\nIn the late antiquity, a variant of Aramaic that was used in some books of the Bible was misnamed as \"Chaldean\" by Jerome of Stridon. That inaccurate usage continued down the centuries in Western Europe, and it was still customary during the nineteenth century, until the misnomer was corrected by scholars. In West Asian, Greek and Hebraic sources, however, the term for the language spoken in Mesopotamia was commonly \"Assyrian\" and later also \"Syriac\". Accordingly, in the earliest recorded \"Western\" mentions of the Christians of what is now Iraq and nearby countries, \"Chaldean\" is used with reference to their language. In 1220/1, Jacques de Vitry wrote that \"they denied that Mary was the Mother of God and claimed that Christ existed in two persons. They consecrated leavened bread and used the 'Chaldean' (Syriac) language\". In the fifteenth century the term \"Chaldeans\" was first applied specifically to Assyrians living in Cyprus who entered a union with Rome, and no longer merely with reference to their language but the name of a new church.\nImpact on Assyrian identity.\nIn the present, Chaldea has been associated with Assyrian separatism through the Chaldean Catholics, and the belief that their descent is based southern Babylonia. While some religious leaders of the Chaldean church and activists in the West have advocated for a separate identity based on this notion, historians and international organizations generally treat Assyrians and Chaldeans as the same group ethnically, owing to genetic, linguistic, geographic, and modern historical factors. However, across the rest of Mesopotamia (particularly the North) after Chaldea fell, the terms \"Assyrian\", and its derivative \"Syrian\" remained the common ethnic term for the Aramaic-speaking inhabitants. These were used by the people themselves and their Persian, Armenian, Arab, Greek, Georgian and Kurdish neighbours both before and after the advent of Christianity in Iraq, Northeast Syria, Southeast Turkey and Northwest Iran. The Assyrian continuity in these regions is well documented."}
{"id": "6600", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6600", "title": "Currying", "text": "In mathematics and computer science, currying is the technique of translating a function that takes multiple arguments into a sequence of families of functions, each taking a single argument.\nIn the prototypical example, one begins with a function formula_1 that takes two arguments, one from formula_2 and one from formula_3 and produces objects in formula_4 The curried form of this function treats the first argument as a parameter, so as to create a family of functions formula_5 The family is arranged so that for each object formula_6 in formula_7 there is exactly one function formula_8 \nIn this example, formula_9 itself becomes a function, that takes formula_10 as an argument, and returns a function that maps each formula_6 to formula_8 The proper notation for expressing this is verbose. The function formula_10 belongs to the set of functions formula_14 Meanwhile, formula_15 belongs to the set of functions formula_16 Thus, something that maps formula_6 to formula_15 will be of the type formula_19 With this notation, formula_9 is a function that takes objects from the first set, and returns objects in the second set, and so one writes formula_21 This is a somewhat informal example; more precise definitions of what is meant by \"object\" and \"function\" are given below. These definitions vary from context to context, and take different forms, depending on the theory that one is working in.\nCurrying is related to, but not the same as, partial application. The example above can be used to illustrate partial application; it is quite similar. Partial application is the function formula_22 that takes the pair formula_10 and formula_6 together as arguments, and returns formula_8 Using the same notation as above, partial application has the signature formula_26 Written this way, application can be seen to be adjoint to currying.\nThe currying of a function with more than two arguments can be defined by induction. \nCurrying is useful in both practical and theoretical settings. In functional programming languages, and many others, it provides a way of automatically managing how arguments are passed to functions and exceptions. In theoretical computer science, it provides a way to study functions with multiple arguments in simpler theoretical models which provide only one argument. The most general setting for the strict notion of currying and uncurrying is in the closed monoidal categories, which underpins a vast generalization of the Curry\u2013Howard correspondence of proofs and programs to a correspondence with many other structures, including quantum mechanics, cobordisms and string theory.\nThe concept of currying was introduced by Gottlob Frege, developed by Moses Sch\u00f6nfinkel,\nand further developed by Haskell Curry.\nUncurrying is the dual transformation to currying, and can be seen as a form of defunctionalization. It takes a function formula_10 whose return value is another function formula_28, and yields a new function formula_29 that takes as parameters the arguments for both formula_10 and formula_28, and returns, as a result, the application of formula_10 and subsequently, formula_28, to those arguments. The process can be iterated.\nMotivation.\nCurrying provides a way for working with functions that take multiple arguments, and using them in frameworks where functions might take only one argument. For example, some analytical techniques can only be applied to functions with a single argument. Practical functions frequently take more arguments than this. Frege showed that it was sufficient to provide solutions for the single argument case, as it was possible to transform a function with multiple arguments into a chain of single-argument functions instead. This transformation is the process now known as currying. All \"ordinary\" functions that might typically be encountered in mathematical analysis or in computer programming can be curried. However, there are categories in which currying is not possible; the most general categories which allow currying are the closed monoidal categories.\nSome programming languages almost always use curried functions to achieve multiple arguments; notable examples are ML and Haskell, where in both cases all functions have exactly one argument. This property is inherited from lambda calculus, where multi-argument functions are usually represented in curried form.\nCurrying is related to, but not the same as partial application. In practice, the programming technique of closures can be used to perform partial application and a kind of currying, by hiding arguments in an environment that travels with the curried function.\nHistory.\nThe \"Curry\" in \"Currying\" is a reference to logician Haskell Curry, who used the concept extensively, but Moses Sch\u00f6nfinkel had the idea six years before Curry. The alternative name \"Sch\u00f6nfinkelisation\" has been proposed. In the mathematical context, the principle can be traced back to work in 1893 by Frege.\nThe originator of the word \"currying\" is not clear. David Turner says the word was coined by Christopher Strachey in his 1967 lecture notes Fundamental Concepts in Programming Languages, but that source introduces the concept as \"a device originated by Sch\u00f6nfinkel\", and the term \"currying\" is not used, while Curry is mentioned later in the context of higher-order functions. John C. Reynolds defined \"currying\" in a 1972 paper, but did not claim to have coined the term.\nDefinition.\nCurrying is most easily understood by starting with an informal definition, which can then be molded to fit many different domains. First, there is some notation to be established. The notation formula_34 denotes all functions from formula_2 to formula_36. If formula_10 is such a function, we write formula_38. Let formula_39 denote the ordered pairs of the elements of formula_2 and formula_36 respectively, that is, the Cartesian product of formula_2 and formula_36. Here, formula_2 and formula_36 may be sets, or they may be types, or they may be other kinds of objects, as explored below.\nGiven a function\ncurrying constructs a new function\nThat is, formula_28 takes an argument of type formula_2 and returns a function of type formula_50. It is defined by\nfor formula_6 of type formula_2 and formula_54 of type formula_36. We then also write\nUncurrying is the reverse transformation, and is most easily understood in terms of its right adjoint, the function formula_57\nSet theory.\nIn set theory, the notation formula_58 is used to denote the set of functions from the set formula_2 to the set formula_36. Currying is the natural bijection between the set formula_61 of functions from formula_62 to formula_63, and the set formula_64 of functions from formula_65 to the set of functions from formula_66 to formula_63. In symbols:\nIndeed, it is this natural bijection that justifies the exponential notation for the set of functions. As is the case in all instances of currying, the formula above describes an adjoint pair of functors: for every fixed set formula_66, the functor formula_70 is left adjoint to the functor formula_71.\nIn the category of sets, the object formula_58 is called the exponential object.\nFunction spaces.\nIn the theory of function spaces, such as in functional analysis or homotopy theory, one is commonly interested in continuous functions between topological spaces. One writes formula_73 (the Hom functor) for the set of \"all\" functions from formula_2 to formula_36, and uses the notation formula_58 to denote the subset of continuous functions. Here, formula_77 is the bijection\nwhile uncurrying is the inverse map. If the set formula_58 of continuous functions from formula_2 to formula_36 is given the compact-open topology, and if the space formula_36 is locally compact Hausdorff, then\nis a homeomorphism. This is also the case when formula_2, formula_36 and formula_58 are compactly generated, although there are more cases.\nOne useful corollary is that a function is continuous if and only if its curried form is continuous. Another important result is that the application map, usually called \"evaluation\" in this context, is continuous (note that eval is a strictly different concept in computer science.) That is,\nformula_87\nis continuous when formula_58 is compact-open and formula_36 locally compact Hausdorff. These two results are central for establishing the continuity of homotopy, i.e. when formula_2 is the unit interval formula_91, so that formula_92 can be thought of as either a homotopy of two functions from formula_36 to formula_94, or, equivalently, a single (continuous) path in formula_95.\nAlgebraic topology.\nIn algebraic topology, currying serves as an example of Eckmann\u2013Hilton duality, and, as such, plays an important role in a variety of different settings. For example, loop space is adjoint to reduced suspensions; this is commonly written as\nwhere formula_97 is the set of homotopy classes of maps formula_98, and formula_99 is the suspension of \"A\", and formula_100 is the loop space of \"A\". In essence, the suspension formula_101 can be seen as the cartesian product of formula_2 with the unit interval, modulo an equivalence relation to turn the interval into a loop. The curried form then maps the space formula_2 to the space of functions from loops into formula_94, that is, from formula_2 into formula_106. Then formula_77 is the adjoint functor that maps suspensions to loop spaces, and uncurrying is the dual.\nThe duality between the mapping cone and the mapping fiber (cofibration and fibration) can be understood as a form of currying, which in turn leads to the duality of the long exact and coexact Puppe sequences.\nIn homological algebra, the relationship between currying and uncurrying is known as tensor-hom adjunction. Here, an interesting twist arises: the Hom functor and the tensor product functor might not lift to an exact sequence; this leads to the definition of the Ext functor and the Tor functor.\nDomain theory.\nIn order theory, that is, the theory of lattices of partially ordered sets, formula_77 is a continuous function when the lattice is given the Scott topology. Scott-continuous functions were first investigated in the attempt to provide a semantics for lambda calculus (as ordinary set theory is inadequate to do this). More generally, Scott-continuous functions are now studied in domain theory, which encompasses the study of denotational semantics of computer algorithms. Note that the Scott topology is quite different than many common topologies one might encounter in the category of topological spaces; the Scott topology is typically finer, and is not sober.\nThe notion of continuity makes its appearance in homotopy type theory, where, roughly speaking, two computer programs can be considered to be homotopic, i.e. compute the same results, if they can be \"continuously\" refactored from one to the other.\nLambda calculi.\nIn theoretical computer science, currying provides a way to study functions with multiple arguments in very simple theoretical models, such as the lambda calculus, in which functions only take a single argument. Consider a function formula_109 taking two arguments, and having the type formula_110, which should be understood to mean that \"x\" must have the type formula_2, \"y\" must have the type formula_36, and the function itself returns the type formula_94. The curried form of \"f\" is defined as\nwhere formula_115 is the abstractor of lambda calculus. Since curry takes, as input, functions with the type formula_116, one concludes that the type of curry itself is\nThe \u2192 operator is often considered right-associative, so the curried function type formula_118 is often written as formula_119. Conversely, function application is considered to be left-associative, so that formula_120 is equivalent to\nThat is, the parenthesis are not required to disambiguate the order of the application.\nCurried functions may be used in any programming language that supports closures; however, uncurried functions are generally preferred for efficiency reasons, since the overhead of partial application and closure creation can then be avoided for most function calls.\nType theory.\nIn type theory, the general idea of a type system in computer science is formalized into a specific algebra of types. For example, when writing formula_38, the intent is that formula_2 and formula_36 are types, while the arrow formula_125 is a type constructor, specifically, the function type or arrow type. Similarly, the Cartesian product formula_39 of types is constructed by the product type constructor formula_127.\nThe type-theoretical approach is expressed in programming languages such as ML and the languages derived from and inspired by it: Caml, Haskell, and F#.\nThe type-theoretical approach provides a natural complement to the language of category theory, as discussed below. This is because categories, and specifically, monoidal categories, have an internal language, with simply-typed lambda calculus being the most prominent example of such a language. It is important in this context, because it can be built from a single type constructor, the arrow type. Currying then endows the language with a natural product type. The correspondence between objects in categories and types then allows programming languages to be re-interpreted as logics (via Curry\u2013Howard correspondence), and as other types of mathematical systems, as explored further, below.\nLogic.\nUnder the Curry\u2013Howard correspondence, the existence of currying and uncurrying is equivalent to the logical theorem formula_128 (also known as exportation), as tuples (product type) corresponds to conjunction in logic, and function type corresponds to implication.\nThe exponential object formula_129 in the category of Heyting algebras is normally written as material implication formula_130. Distributive Heyting algebras are Boolean algebras, and the exponential object has the explicit form formula_131, thus making it clear that the exponential object really is material implication.\nCategory theory.\nThe above notions of currying and uncurrying find their most general, abstract statement in category theory. Currying is a universal property of an exponential object, and gives rise to an adjunction in cartesian closed categories. That is, there is a natural isomorphism between the morphisms from a binary product formula_46 and the morphisms to an exponential object formula_133.\nThis generalizes to a broader result in closed monoidal categories: Currying is the statement that the tensor product and the internal Hom are adjoint functors; that is, for every object formula_65 there is a natural isomorphism:\nHere, \"Hom\" denotes the (external) Hom-functor of all morphisms in the category, while formula_136 denotes the internal hom functor in the closed monoidal category. For the category of sets, the two are the same. When the product is the cartesian product, then the internal hom formula_136 becomes the exponential object formula_138.\nCurrying can break down in one of two ways. One is if a category is not closed, and thus lacks an internal hom functor (possibly because there is more than one choice for such a functor). Another way is if it is not monoidal, and thus lacks a product (that is, lacks a way of writing down pairs of objects). Categories that do have both products and internal homs are exactly the closed monoidal categories.\nThe setting of cartesian closed categories is sufficient for the discussion of classical logic; the more general setting of closed monoidal categories is suitable for quantum computation.\nThe difference between these two is that the product for cartesian categories (such as the category of sets, complete partial orders or Heyting algebras) is just the Cartesian product; it is interpreted as an ordered pair of items (or a list). Simply typed lambda calculus is the internal language of cartesian closed categories; and it is for this reason that pairs and lists are the primary types in the type theory of LISP, Scheme and many functional programming languages.\nBy contrast, the product for monoidal categories (such as Hilbert space and the vector spaces of functional analysis) is the tensor product. The internal language of such categories is linear logic, a form of quantum logic; the corresponding type system is the linear type system. Such categories are suitable for describing entangled quantum states, and, more generally, allow a vast generalization of the Curry\u2013Howard correspondence to quantum mechanics, to cobordisms in algebraic topology, and to string theory. The linear type system, and linear logic are useful for describing synchronization primitives, such as mutual exclusion locks, and the operation of vending machines.\nContrast with partial function application.\nCurrying and partial function application are often conflated. One of the significant differences between the two is that a call to a partially applied function returns the result right away, not another function down the currying chain; this distinction can be illustrated clearly for functions whose arity is greater than two.\nGiven a function of type formula_139, currying produces formula_140. That is, while an evaluation of the first function might be represented as formula_141, evaluation of the curried function would be represented as formula_142, applying each argument in turn to a single-argument function returned by the previous invocation. Note that after calling formula_143, we are left with a function that takes a single argument and returns another function, not a function that takes two arguments.\nIn contrast, partial function application refers to the process of fixing a number of arguments to a function, producing another function of smaller arity. Given the definition of formula_10 above, we might fix (or 'bind') the first argument, producing a function of type formula_145. Evaluation of this function might be represented as formula_146. Note that the result of partial function application in this case is a function that takes two arguments.\nIntuitively, partial function application says \"if you fix the first argument of the function, you get a function of the remaining arguments\". For example, if function \"div\" stands for the division operation \"x\"/\"y\", then \"div\" with the parameter \"x\" fixed at 1 (i.e., \"div\" 1) is another function: the same as the function \"inv\" that returns the multiplicative inverse of its argument, defined by \"inv\"(\"y\") =\u00a01/\"y\".\nThe practical motivation for partial application is that very often the functions obtained by supplying some but not all of the arguments to a function are useful; for example, many languages have a function or operator similar to codice_1. Partial application makes it easy to define these functions, for example by creating a function that represents the addition operator with 1 bound as its first argument.\nPartial application can be seen as evaluating a curried function at a fixed point, e.g. given formula_139 and formula_148 then formula_149 or simply formula_150 where formula_151 curries f's first parameter.\nThus, partial application is reduced to a curried function at a fixed point. Further, a curried function at a fixed point is (trivially), a partial application. For further evidence, note that, given any function formula_109, a function formula_153 may be defined such that formula_154. Thus, any partial application may be reduced to a single curry operation. As such, curry is more suitably defined as an operation which, in many theoretical cases, is often applied recursively, but which is theoretically indistinguishable (when considered as an operation) from a partial application.\nSo, a partial application can be defined as the objective result of a single application of the curry operator on some ordering of the inputs of some function."}
{"id": "6601", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6601", "title": "Cyrus", "text": "Cyrus (Persian: \u06a9\u0648\u0631\u0648\u0634) is a male given name and the name of several Persian kings, particularly Cyrus the Great ( BC), but also Cyrus I of Anshan ( BC), King of Persia and the grandfather of Cyrus the Great, and Cyrus the Younger (died 401 BC), brother to the Persian king Artaxerxes II of Persia.\nEtymology.\nCyrus, as a word in English, is the Latinized form of the Greek \u039a\u1fe6\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2, \"K\u0233ros\", from Old Persian \"K\u016bru\u0161\". According to the inscriptions, the name is reflected in Elamite \"Kura\u0161\", Babylonian \"Ku(r)-ra\u0161/-ra-\u00e1\u0161\" and Imperial Aramaic \"kwr\u0161\". The modern Persian form of the name is \"K\u016bro\u0161\".\nThe etymology of Cyrus has been and continues to be a topic of discussion amongst historians, linguists, and scholars of Iranology. The Old Persian name \"kuru\u0161\" has been interpreted in various forms such as \"the Sun\", \"like Sun\", \"young\", \"hero,\" and \"humiliator of the enemy in verbal contest\" and the Elamite \"kura\u0161\" has been translated as one \"who bestows care\".\nThe name has appeared on many monuments and inscriptions in Old Persian. There is also the record of a small inscription in Morghab (southwestern Iran) on which there is the sentence (\"adam k\u016bru\u0161 x\u0161\u0101ya\u03b8iya hax\u0101mani\u0161iya\") in Old Persian meaning (\"I am Cyrus the Achaemenian King\"). After a questionable proposal by the German linguist F. H. Weissbach that Darius the Great was the first to inscribe in Persian, it had previously been concluded by some scholars that the inscription in Morghab refers to Cyrus the Younger. This proposal resulted from a false interpretation of a passage in paragraph 70 of the Behistun inscription by Darius the Great. Based on many arguments, the accepted theory among modern scholars is that the inscription does belong to Cyrus the Great.\nThere are interpretations of the name of Cyrus by classical authors identifying with or referring to the Persian word for \"Sun\". The Historian Plutarch (46\u2013120) states that \"the sun, which, in the Persian language, is called Cyrus\". Also, the Physician Ctesias who served in the court of the Persian king Artaxerxes II of Persia writes in his book \"Persica\" as summarized by Photios that the name Cyrus is from the Persian word \"Khur\" (the sun). These are, however, not accepted by modern scholars.\nRegarding the etymology of Old Persian \"kuru\u0161\", linguists have proposed various etymologies based on Iranian languages as well as non-Indo-European ones. According to Tavernier, the name \"kura\u0161\", attested in Elamite texts, is likely \"the original form\" as there is no Elamite or Babylonian spelling \"ku-ru-u\u0161\" in the transcriptions of Old Persian \"ku-u-r(u)-u-\u0161\". That is, according to Tavernier, \"kura\u0161\" is an Elamite name and means \"to bestow care\". Others, such as Schmitt, Hoffmann maintain that the Persian \"Kuru\u0161\", which according to Skalmowsky, may be connected to (or borrowing from) the IE \"K\u00faru-\" from Old Indic can give an etymology of the Elamite \"kura\u0161\". In this regard, the Old Persian \"kuru\u0161\" is considered with the following etymologies: One proposal is discussed by the linguist Janos Harmatta that refers to the common Iranian root \"kur-\" (be born) of many words in Old, middle, and new Iranian languages (e.g. Kurdish). Accordingly, the name K\u016bru\u0161 means \"young, youth...\". Other Iranian etymologies have been proposed. The Indian proposal of Skalmowsky goes down to \"to do, accomplish\". Another theory is the suggestion of Karl Hoffmann that \"kuru\u0161\" goes down to a \"-ru\" derivation from the IE root \"*(s)kau\" meaning \"to humiliate\" and accordingly \"kuru\u0161\" (hence \"Cyrus\") means \"\"humiliator\" (of the enemy in verbal contest)\".\nPeople and fictional characters named Cyrus include:"}
{"id": "6603", "revid": "48932058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6603", "title": "Case", "text": "Case or CASE may refer to:"}
{"id": "6604", "revid": "47183495", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6604", "title": "Rendering (computer graphics)", "text": "Rendering is the process of generating a photorealistic or non-photorealistic image from input data such as 3D models. The word \"rendering\" (in one of its senses) originally meant the task performed by an artist when depicting a real or imaginary thing (the finished artwork is also called a \"rendering\"). Today, to \"render\" commonly means to generate an image or video from a precise description (often created by an artist) using a computer program.\nA software application or component that performs rendering is called a rendering engine, render engine, , graphics engine, or simply a renderer.\nA distinction is made between real-time rendering, in which images are generated and displayed immediately (ideally fast enough to give the impression of motion or animation), and offline rendering (sometimes called pre-rendering) in which images, or film or video frames, are generated for later viewing. Offline rendering can use a slower and higher-quality renderer. Interactive applications such as games must primarily use real-time rendering, although they may incorporate pre-rendered content.\nRendering can produce images of scenes or objects defined using coordinates in 3D space, seen from a particular viewpoint. Such 3D rendering uses knowledge and ideas from optics, the study of visual perception, mathematics, and software engineering, and it has applications such as video games, simulators, visual effects for films and television, design visualization, and medical diagnosis. Realistic 3D rendering requires finding approximate solutions to the rendering equation, which describes how light propagates in an environment.\nReal-time rendering uses high-performance \"rasterization\" algorithms that process a list of shapes and determine which pixels are covered by each shape. When more realism is required (e.g. for architectural visualization or visual effects) slower pixel-by-pixel algorithms such as \"ray tracing\" are used instead. (Ray tracing can also be used selectively during rasterized rendering to improve the realism of lighting and reflections.) A type of ray tracing called \"path tracing\" is currently the most common technique for photorealistic rendering. Path tracing is also popular for generating high-quality non-photorealistic images, such as frames for 3D animated films. Both rasterization and ray tracing can be sped up (\"accelerated\") by specially designed microprocessors called GPUs.\nRasterization algorithms are also used to render images containing only 2D shapes such as polygons and text. Applications of this type of rendering include digital illustration, graphic design, 2D animation, desktop publishing and the display of user interfaces.\nHistorically, rendering was called image synthesis but today this term is likely to mean AI image generation. The term \"neural rendering\" is sometimes used when a neural network is the primary means of generating an image but some degree of control over the output image is provided. Neural networks can also assist rendering without replacing traditional algorithms, e.g. by removing noise from path traced images.\nFeatures.\nPhotorealistic rendering.\nA large proportion of computer graphics research has worked towards producing images that resemble photographs. Fundamental techniques that make this possible were invented in the 1980s, but at the end of the decade, photorealism for complex scenes was still considered a distant goal. Today, photorealism is routinely achievable for offline rendering, but remains difficult for real-time rendering.\nIn order to produce realistic images, rendering must simulate how light travels from light sources, is reflected, refracted, and scattered (often many times) by objects in the scene, passes through a camera lens, and finally reaches the film or sensor of the camera. The physics used in these simulations is primarily geometrical optics, in which particles of light follow (usually straight) lines called \"rays\", but in some situations (such as when rendering thin films, like the surface of soap bubbles) the wave nature of light must be taken into account.\nEffects that may need to be simulated include:\nIn realistic scenes, objects are illuminated both by light that arrives directly from a light source (after passing mostly unimpeded through air), and light that has bounced off other objects in the scene. The simulation of this complex lighting is called global illumination. In the past, indirect lighting was often faked (especially when rendering animated films) by placing additional hidden lights in the scene, but today path tracing is used to render it accurately.\nFor true photorealism, the camera used to take the photograph must be simulated. The \"thin lens approximation\" allows combining perspective projection with depth of field (and bokeh) emulation. Camera lens simulations can be made more realistic by modeling the way light is refracted by the components of the lens. Motion blur is often simulated if film or video frames are being rendered. Simulated lens flare and bloom are often added to make the image appear subjectively brighter (although the design of real cameras tries to reduce these effects).\nRealistic rendering uses mathematical descriptions of how different surface materials reflect light, called \"reflectance models\" or (when physically plausible) \"bidirectional reflectance distribution functions (BRDFs)\". Rendering materials such as marble, plant leaves, and human skin requires simulating an effect called subsurface scattering, in which a portion of the light travels into the material, is scattered, and then travels back out again. The way color, and properties such as roughness, vary over a surface can be represented efficiently using texture mapping.\nOther styles of 3D rendering.\nFor some applications (including early stages of 3D modeling), simplified rendering styles such as wireframe rendering may be appropriate, particularly when the material and surface details have not been defined and only the shape of an object is known. Games and other real-time applications may use simpler and less realistic rendering techniques as an artistic or design choice, or to allow higher frame rates on lower-end hardware.\nOrthographic and isometric projections can be used for a stylized effect or to ensure that parallel lines are depicted as parallel in CAD rendering.\nNon-photorealistic rendering (NPR) uses techniques like edge detection and posterization to produce 3D images that resemble technical illustrations, cartoons, or other styles of drawing or painting.\nInputs.\nBefore a 3D scene or 2D image can be rendered, it must be described in a way that the rendering software can understand. Historically, inputs for both 2D and 3D rendering were usually text files, which are easier than binary files for humans to edit and debug. For 3D graphics, text formats have largely been supplanted by more efficient binary formats, and by APIs which allow interactive applications to communicate directly with a rendering component without generating a file on disk (although a scene description is usually still created in memory prior to rendering).\nTraditional rendering algorithms use geometric descriptions of 3D scenes or 2D images. Applications and algorithms that render visualizations of data scanned from the real world, or scientific simulations, may require different types of input data.\nThe PostScript format (which is often credited with the rise of desktop publishing) provides a standardized, interoperable way to describe 2D graphics and page layout. The Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) format is also text-based, and the PDF format uses the PostScript language internally. In contrast, although many 3D graphics file formats have been standardized (including text-based formats such as VRML and X3D), different rendering applications typically use formats tailored to their needs, and this has led to a proliferation of proprietary and open formats, with binary files being more common.\n2D vector graphics.\nA vector graphics image description may include:\n3D geometry.\nA geometric scene description may include:\nMany file formats exist for storing individual 3D objects or \"models\". These can be imported into a larger scene, or loaded on-demand by rendering software or games. A realistic scene may require hundreds of items like household objects, vehicles, and trees, and 3D artists often utilize large libraries of models. In game production, these models (along with other data such as textures, audio files, and animations) are referred to as \"assets\".\nVolumetric data.\nScientific and engineering visualization often requires rendering volumetric data generated by 3D scans or simulations. Perhaps the most common source of such data is medical CT and MRI scans, which need to be rendered for diagnosis. Volumetric data can be extremely large, and requires specialized data formats to store it efficiently, particularly if the volume is \"sparse\" (with empty regions that do not contain data).\nBefore rendering, level sets for volumetric data can be extracted and converted into a mesh of triangles, e.g. by using the marching cubes algorithm. Algorithms have also been developed that work directly with volumetric data, for example to render realistic depictions of the way light is scattered and absorbed by clouds and smoke, and this type of volumetric rendering is used extensively in visual effects for movies. When rendering lower-resolution volumetric data without interpolation, the individual cubes or \"voxels\" may be visible, an effect sometimes used deliberately for game graphics.\nPhotogrammetry and scanning.\nPhotographs of real world objects can be incorporated into a rendered scene by using them as textures for 3D objects. Photos of a scene can also be stitched together to create panoramic images or environment maps, which allow the scene to be rendered very efficiently but only from a single viewpoint. Scanning of real objects and scenes using structured light or lidar produces point clouds consisting of the coordinates of millions of individual points in space, sometimes along with color information. These point clouds may either be rendered directly or converted into meshes before rendering. (Note: \"point cloud\" sometimes also refers to a minimalist rendering style that can be used for any 3D geometry, similar to wireframe rendering.)\nNeural approximations and light fields.\nA more recent, experimental approach is description of scenes using radiance fields which define the color, intensity, and direction of incoming light at each point in space. (This is conceptually similar to, but not identical to, the light field recorded by a hologram.) For any useful resolution, the amount of data in a radiance field is so large that it is impractical to represent it directly as volumetric data, and an approximation function must be found. Neural networks are typically used to generate and evaluate these approximations, sometimes using video frames, or a collection of photographs of a scene taken at different angles, as \"training data\".\nAlgorithms related to neural networks have recently been used to find approximations of a scene as 3D Gaussians. The resulting representation is similar to a point cloud, except that it uses fuzzy, partially-transparent blobs of varying dimensions and orientations instead of points. As with neural radiance fields, these approximations are often generated from photographs or video frames.\nOutputs.\nThe output of rendering may be displayed immediately on the screen (many times a second, in the case of real-time rendering such as games) or saved in a raster graphics file format such as JPEG or PNG. High-end rendering applications commonly use the OpenEXR file format, which can represent finer gradations of colors and high dynamic range lighting, allowing tone mapping or other adjustments to be applied afterwards without loss of quality.\nQuickly rendered animations can be saved directly as video files, but for high-quality rendering, individual frames (which may be rendered by different computers in a cluster or \"render farm\" and may take hours or even days to render) are output as separate files and combined later into a video clip.\nThe output of a renderer sometimes includes more than just RGB color values. For example, the spectrum can be sampled using multiple wavelengths of light, or additional information such as depth (distance from camera) or the material of each point in the image can be included (this data can be used during compositing or when generating texture maps for real-time rendering, or used to assist in removing noise from a path-traced image). Transparency information can be included, allowing rendered foreground objects to be composited with photographs or video. It is also sometimes useful to store the contributions of different lights, or of specular and diffuse lighting, as separate channels, so lighting can be adjusted after rendering. The OpenEXR format allows storing many channels of data in a single file.\nTechniques.\nChoosing how to render a 3D scene usually involves trade-offs between speed, memory usage, and realism (although realism is not always desired). The developed over the years follow a loose progression, with more advanced methods becoming practical as computing power and memory capacity increased. Multiple techniques may be used for a single final image.\nAn important distinction is between image order algorithms, which iterate over pixels of the image plane, and object order algorithms, which iterate over objects in the scene. For simple scenes, object order is usually more efficient, as there are fewer objects than pixels.\nEach of the above approaches has many variations, and there is some overlap. Path tracing may be considered either a distinct technique or a particular type of ray tracing. Note that the usage of terminology related to ray tracing and path tracing has changed significantly over time.\nRay marching is a family of algorithms, used by ray casting, for finding intersections between a ray and a complex object, such as a volumetric dataset or a surface defined by a signed distance function. It is not, by itself, a rendering method, but it can be incorporated into ray tracing and path tracing, and is used by rasterization to implement screen-space reflection and other effects.\nA technique called photon mapping traces paths of photons from a light source to an object, accumulating data about irradiance which is then used during conventional ray tracing or path tracing. Rendering a scene using only rays traced from the light source to the camera is impractical, even though it corresponds more closely to reality, because a huge number of photons would need to be simulated, only a tiny fraction of which actually hit the camera.\nSome authors call conventional ray tracing \"backward\" ray tracing because it traces the paths of photons backwards from the camera to the light source, and call following paths from the light source (as in photon mapping) \"forward\" ray tracing. However sometimes the meaning of these terms is reversed. Tracing rays starting at the light source can also be called \"particle tracing\" or \"light tracing\", which avoids this ambiguity.\nReal-time rendering, including video game graphics, typically uses rasterization, but increasingly combines it with ray tracing and path tracing. To enable realistic global illumination, real-time rendering often relies on pre-rendered (\"baked\") lighting for stationary objects. For moving objects, it may use a technique called \"light probes\", in which lighting is recorded by rendering omnidirectional views of the scene at chosen points in space (often points on a grid to allow easier interpolation). These are similar to environment maps, but typically use a very low resolution or an approximation such as spherical harmonics. (Note: Blender uses the term 'light probes' for a more general class of pre-recorded lighting data, including reflection maps.)\nRasterization.\nThe term \"rasterization\" (in a broad sense) encompasses many techniques used for 2D rendering and real-time 3D rendering. 3D animated films were rendered by rasterization before ray tracing and path tracing became practical.\nA renderer combines rasterization with \"geometry processing\" (which is not specific to rasterization) and \"pixel processing\" which computes the RGB color values to be placed in the \"framebuffer\" for display.\nThe main tasks of rasterization (including pixel processing) are:\n3D rasterization is typically part of a \"graphics pipeline\" in which an application provides lists of triangles to be rendered, and the rendering system transforms and projects their coordinates, determines which triangles are potentially visible in the \"viewport\", and performs the above rasterization and pixel processing tasks before displaying the final result on the screen.\nHistorically, 3D rasterization used algorithms like the \"Warnock algorithm\" and \"scanline rendering\" (also called \"scan-conversion\"), which can handle arbitrary polygons and can rasterize many shapes simultaneously. Although such algorithms are still important for 2D rendering, 3D rendering now usually divides shapes into triangles and rasterizes them individually using simpler methods.\nHigh-performance algorithms exist for rasterizing 2D lines, including anti-aliased lines, as well as ellipses and filled triangles. An important special case of 2D rasterization is text rendering, which requires careful anti-aliasing and rounding of coordinates to avoid distorting the letterforms and preserve spacing, density, and sharpness.\nAfter 3D coordinates have been projected onto the image plane, rasterization is primarily a 2D problem, but the 3rd dimension necessitates \"hidden surface removal\". Early computer graphics used geometric algorithms or ray casting to remove the hidden portions of shapes, or used the \"painter's algorithm\", which sorts shapes by depth (distance from camera) and renders them from back to front. Depth sorting was later avoided by incorporating depth comparison into the scanline rendering algorithm. The \"z-buffer\" algorithm performs the comparisons indirectly by including a depth or \"z\" value in the framebuffer. A pixel is only covered by a shape if that shape's z value is lower (indicating closer to the camera) than the z value currently in the buffer. The z-buffer requires additional memory (an expensive resource at the time it was invented) but simplifies the rasterization code and permits multiple passes. Memory is now faster and more plentiful, and a z-buffer is almost always used for real-time rendering.\nA drawback of the basic z-buffer algorithm is that each pixel ends up either entirely covered by a single object or filled with the background color, causing jagged edges in the final image. Early \"anti-aliasing\" approaches addressed this by detecting when a pixel is partially covered by a shape, and calculating the covered area. The A-buffer (and other sub-pixel and multi-sampling techniques) solve the problem less precisely but with higher performance. For real-time 3D graphics, it has become common to use complicated heuristics (and even neural-networks) to perform anti-aliasing.\nIn 3D rasterization, color is usually determined by a \"pixel shader\" or \"fragment shader\", a small program that is run for each pixel. The shader does not (or cannot) directly access 3D data for the entire scene (this would be very slow, and would result in an algorithm similar to ray tracing) and a variety of techniques have been developed to render effects like shadows and reflections using only texture mapping and multiple passes.\nOlder and more basic 3D rasterization implementations did not support shaders, and used simple shading techniques such as \"flat shading\" (lighting is computed once for each triangle, which is then rendered entirely in one color), \"Gouraud shading\" (lighting is computed using normal vectors defined at vertices and then colors are interpolated across each triangle), or \"Phong shading\" (normal vectors are interpolated across each triangle and lighting is computed for each pixel).\nUntil relatively recently, Pixar used rasterization for rendering its animated films. Unlike the renderers commonly used for real-time graphics, the Reyes rendering system in Pixar's RenderMan software was optimized for rendering very small (pixel-sized) polygons, and incorporated stochastic sampling techniques more typically associated with ray tracing.\nRay casting.\nOne of the simplest ways to render a 3D scene is to test if a ray starting at the viewpoint (the \"eye\" or \"camera\") intersects any of the geometric shapes in the scene, repeating this test using a different ray direction for each pixel. This method, called \"ray casting\", was important in early computer graphics, and is a fundamental building block for more advanced algorithms. Ray casting can be used to render shapes defined by \"constructive solid geometry\" (CSG) operations.\nEarly ray casting experiments include the work of Arthur Appel in the 1960s. Appel rendered shadows by casting an additional ray from each visible surface point towards a light source. He also tried rendering the density of illumination by casting random rays from the light source towards the object and plotting the intersection points (similar to the later technique called \"photon mapping\").\nWhen rendering scenes containing many objects, testing the intersection of a ray with every object becomes very expensive. Special data structures are used to speed up this process by allowing large numbers of objects to be excluded quickly (such as objects behind the camera). These structures are analogous to database indexes for finding the relevant objects. The most common are the \"bounding volume hierarchy\" (BVH), which stores a pre-computed bounding box or sphere for each branch of a tree of objects, and the \"k-d tree\" which recursively divides space into two parts. Recent GPUs include hardware acceleration for BVH intersection tests. K-d trees are a special case of \"binary space partitioning\", which was frequently used in early computer graphics (it can also generate a rasterization order for the painter's algorithm). \"Octrees\", another historically popular technique, are still often used for volumetric data.\nGeometric formulas are sufficient for finding the intersection of a ray with shapes like spheres, polygons, and polyhedra, but for most curved surfaces there is no analytic solution, or the intersection is difficult to compute accurately using limited precision floating point numbers. Root-finding algorithms such as Newton's method can sometimes be used. To avoid these complications, curved surfaces are often approximated as meshes of triangles. Volume rendering (e.g. rendering clouds and smoke), and some surfaces such as fractals, may require ray marching instead of basic ray casting.\nRay tracing.\nRay casting can be used to render an image by tracing light rays backwards from a simulated camera. After finding a point on a surface where a ray originated, another ray is traced towards the light source to determine if anything is casting a shadow on that point. If not, a \"reflectance model\" (such as Lambertian reflectance for matte surfaces, or the Phong reflection model for glossy surfaces) is used to compute the probability that a photon arriving from the light would be reflected towards the camera, and this is multiplied by the brightness of the light to determine the pixel brightness. If there are multiple light sources, brightness contributions of the lights are added together. For color images, calculations are repeated for multiple wavelengths of light (e.g. red, green, and blue).\n\"Classical ray tracing\" (also called \"Whitted-style\" or \"recursive\" ray tracing) extends this method so it can render mirrors and transparent objects. If a ray traced backwards from the camera originates at a point on a mirror, the reflection formula from geometric optics is used to calculate the direction the reflected ray came from, and another ray is cast backwards in that direction. If a ray originates at a transparent surface, rays are cast backwards for both reflected and refracted rays (using Snell's law to compute the refracted direction), and so ray tracing needs to support a branching \"tree\" of rays. In simple implementations, a recursive function is called to trace each ray.\nRay tracing usually performs anti-aliasing by taking the average of multiple samples for each pixel. It may also use multiple samples for effects like depth of field and motion blur. If evenly-spaced ray directions or times are used for each of these features, many rays are required, and some aliasing will remain. \"Cook-style\", \"stochastic\", or \"Monte Carlo ray tracing\" avoids this problem by using random sampling instead of evenly-spaced samples. This type of ray tracing is commonly called \"distributed ray tracing\", or \"distribution ray tracing\" because it samples rays from probability distributions. Distribution ray tracing can also render realistic \"soft\" shadows from large lights by using a random sample of points on the light when testing for shadowing, and it can simulate chromatic aberration by sampling multiple wavelengths from the spectrum of light.\nReal surface materials reflect small amounts of light in almost every direction because they have small (or microscopic) bumps and grooves. A distribution ray tracer can simulate this by sampling possible ray directions, which allows rendering blurry reflections from glossy and metallic surfaces. However if this procedure is repeated recursively to simulate realistic indirect lighting, and if more than one sample is taken at each surface point, the tree of rays quickly becomes huge. Another kind of ray tracing, called \"path tracing\", handles indirect light more efficiently, avoiding branching, and ensures that the distribution of all possible paths from a light source to the camera is sampled in an unbiased way.\nRay tracing was often used for rendering reflections in animated films, until path tracing became standard for film rendering. Films such as Shrek 2 and Monsters University also used distribution ray tracing or path tracing to precompute indirect illumination for a scene or frame prior to rendering it using rasterization.\nAdvances in GPU technology have made real-time ray tracing possible in games, although it is currently almost always used in combination with rasterization. This enables visual effects that are difficult with only rasterization, including reflection from curved surfaces and interreflective objects, and shadows that are accurate over a wide range of distances and surface orientations. Ray tracing support is included in recent versions of the graphics APIs used by games, such as DirectX, Metal, and Vulkan.\nRay tracing has been used to render simulated black holes, and the appearance of objects moving at close to the speed of light, by taking spacetime curvature and relativistic effects into account during light ray simulation.\nRadiosity.\nRadiosity (named after the radiometric quantity of the same name) is a method for rendering objects illuminated by light bouncing off rough or matte surfaces. This type of illumination is called \"indirect light\", \"environment lighting\", \"diffuse lighting\", or \"diffuse interreflection\", and the problem of rendering it realistically is called \"global illumination\". Rasterization and basic forms of ray tracing (other than distribution ray tracing and path tracing) can only roughly approximate indirect light, e.g. by adding a uniform \"ambient\" lighting amount chosen by the artist. Radiosity techniques are also suited to rendering scenes with \"area lights\" such as rectangular fluorescent lighting panels, which are difficult for rasterization and traditional ray tracing. Radiosity is considered a physically-based method, meaning that it aims to simulate the flow of light in an environment using equations and experimental data from physics, however it often assumes that all surfaces are opaque and perfectly Lambertian, which reduces realism and limits its applicability.\nIn the original radiosity method (first proposed in 1984) now called \"classical radiosity\", surfaces and lights in the scene are split into pieces called \"patches\", a process called \"meshing\" (this step makes it a finite element method). The rendering code must then determine what fraction of the light being emitted or diffusely reflected (scattered) by each patch is received by each other patch. These fractions are called \"form factors\" or \"view factors\" (first used in engineering to model radiative heat transfer). The form factors are multiplied by the albedo of the receiving surface and put in a matrix. The lighting in the scene can then be expressed as a matrix equation (or equivalently a system of linear equations) that can be solved by methods from linear algebra.\nSolving the radiosity equation gives the total amount of light emitted and reflected by each patch, which is divided by area to get a value called \"radiosity\" that can be used when rasterizing or ray tracing to determine the color of pixels corresponding to visible parts of the patch. For real-time rendering, this value (or more commonly the irradiance, which does not depend on local surface albedo) can be pre-computed and stored in a texture (called an \"irradiance map\") or stored as vertex data for 3D models. This feature was used in architectural visualization software to allow real-time walk-throughs of a building interior after computing the lighting.\nThe large size of the matrices used in classical radiosity (the square of the number of patches) causes problems for realistic scenes. Practical implementations may use Jacobi or Gauss-Seidel iterations, which is equivalent (at least in the Jacobi case) to simulating the propagation of light one bounce at a time until the amount of light remaining (not yet absorbed by surfaces) is insignificant. The number of iterations (bounces) required is dependent on the scene, not the number of patches, so the total work is proportional to the square of the number of patches (in contrast, solving the matrix equation using Gaussian elimination requires work proportional to the cube of the number of patches). Form factors may be recomputed when they are needed, to avoid storing a complete matrix in memory.\nThe quality of rendering is often determined by the size of the patches, e.g. very fine meshes are needed to depict the edges of shadows accurately. An important improvement is \"hierarchical radiosity\", which uses a coarser mesh (larger patches) for simulating the transfer of light between surfaces that are far away from one another, and adaptively sub-divides the patches as needed. This allows radiosity to be used for much larger and more complex scenes.\nAlternative and extended versions of the radiosity method support non-Lambertian surfaces, such as glossy surfaces and mirrors, and sometimes use volumes or \"clusters\" of objects as well as surface patches. Stochastic or Monte Carlo radiosity uses random sampling in various ways, e.g. taking samples of incident light instead of integrating over all patches, which can improve performance but adds noise (this noise can be reduced by using deterministic iterations as a final step, unlike path tracing noise). Simplified and partially precomputed versions of radiosity are widely used for real-time rendering, combined with techniques such as \"octree radiosity\" that store approximations of the light field.\nPath tracing.\nAs part of the approach known as \"physically based rendering\", path tracing has become the dominant technique for rendering realistic scenes, including effects for movies. For example, the popular open source 3D software Blender uses path tracing in its Cycles renderer. Images produced using path tracing for global illumination are generally noisier than when using radiosity (the main competing algorithm for realistic lighting), but radiosity can be difficult to apply to complex scenes and is prone to artifacts that arise from using a tessellated representation of irradiance.\nLike \"distributed ray tracing\", path tracing is a kind of \"stochastic\" or \"randomized\" ray tracing that uses Monte Carlo or Quasi-Monte Carlo integration. It was proposed and named in 1986 by Jim Kajiya in the same paper as the rendering equation. Kajiya observed that much of the complexity of distributed ray tracing could be avoided by only tracing a single path from the camera at a time (in Kajiya's implementation, this \"no branching\" rule was broken by tracing additional rays from each surface intersection point to randomly chosen points on each light source). Kajiya suggested reducing the noise present in the output images by using \"stratified sampling\" and \"importance sampling\" for making random decisions such as choosing which ray to follow at each step of a path. Even with these techniques, path tracing would not have been practical for film rendering, using computers available at the time, because the computational cost of generating enough samples to reduce variance to an acceptable level was too high. Monster House, the first feature film rendered entirely using path tracing, was not released until 20 years later.\nIn its basic form, path tracing is inefficient (requiring too many samples) for rendering caustics and scenes where light enters indirectly through narrow spaces. Attempts were made to address these weaknesses in the 1990s. \"Bidirectional path tracing\" has similarities to photon mapping, tracing rays from the light source and the camera separately, and then finding ways to connect these paths (but unlike photon mapping it usually samples new light paths for each pixel rather than using the same cached data for all pixels). \"Metropolis light transport\" samples paths by modifying paths that were previously traced, spending more time exploring paths that are similar to other \"bright\" paths, which increases the chance of discovering even brighter paths. \"Multiple importance sampling\" provides a way to reduce variance when combining samples from more than one sampling method, particularly when some samples are much noisier than the others.\nThis later work was summarized and expanded upon in Eric Veach's 1997 PhD thesis, which helped raise interest in path tracing in the computer graphics community. The Arnold renderer, first released in 1998, proved that path tracing was practical for rendering frames for films, and that there was a demand for unbiased and physically based rendering in the film industry; other commercial and open source path tracing renderers began appearing. Computational cost was addressed by rapid advances in CPU and cluster performance.\nPath tracing's relative simplicity and its nature as a Monte Carlo method (sampling hundreds or thousands of paths per pixel) have made it attractive to implement on a GPU, especially on recent GPUs that support ray tracing acceleration technology such as Nvidia's RTX and OptiX. However bidirectional path tracing and Metropolis light transport are more difficult to implement efficiently on a GPU.\nResearch into improving path tracing continues. Recent \"path guiding\" approaches construct approximations of the light field probability distribution in each volume of space, so paths can be sampled more effectively. Many techniques have been developed to denoise the output of path tracing, reducing the number of paths required to achieve acceptable quality, at the risk of losing some detail or introducing small-scale artifacts that are more objectionable than noise; neural networks are now widely used for this purpose.\nNeural rendering.\nNeural rendering is a rendering method using artificial neural networks. Neural rendering includes image-based rendering methods that are used to reconstruct 3D models from 2-dimensional images.One of these methods are photogrammetry, which is a method in which a collection of images from multiple angles of an object are turned into a 3D model. There have also been recent developments in generating and rendering 3D models from text and coarse paintings by notably Nvidia, Google and various other companies.\nScientific and mathematical basis.\nThe implementation of a realistic renderer always has some basic element of physical simulation or emulation some computation which resembles or abstracts a real physical process.\nThe term \"physically based\" indicates the use of physical models and approximations that are more general and widely accepted outside rendering. A particular set of related techniques have gradually become established in the rendering community.\nThe basic concepts are moderately straightforward, but intractable to calculate; and a single elegant algorithm or approach has been elusive for more general purpose renderers. In order to meet demands of robustness, accuracy and practicality, an implementation will be a complex combination of different techniques.\nRendering research is concerned with both the adaptation of scientific models and their efficient application.\nMathematics used in rendering includes: linear algebra, calculus, numerical mathematics, signal processing, and Monte Carlo methods.\nThe rendering equation.\nThis is the key academic/theoretical concept in rendering. It serves as the most abstract formal expression of the non-perceptual aspect of rendering. All more complete algorithms can be seen as solutions to particular formulations of this equation.\nMeaning: at a particular position and direction, the outgoing light (Lo) is the sum of the emitted light (Le) and the reflected light. The reflected light being the sum of the incoming light (Li) from all directions, multiplied by the surface reflection and incoming angle. By connecting outward light to inward light, via an interaction point, this equation stands for the whole 'light transport' all the movement of light in a scene.\nThe bidirectional reflectance distribution function.\nThe bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF) expresses a simple model of light interaction with a surface as follows:\nLight interaction is often approximated by the even simpler models: diffuse reflection and specular reflection, although both can ALSO be BRDFs.\nGeometric optics.\nRendering is practically exclusively concerned with the particle aspect of light physics known as geometrical optics. Treating light, at its basic level, as particles bouncing around is a simplification, but appropriate: the wave aspects of light are negligible in most scenes, and are significantly more difficult to simulate. Notable wave aspect phenomena include diffraction (as seen in the colours of CDs and DVDs) and polarisation (as seen in LCDs). Both types of effect, if needed, are made by appearance-oriented adjustment of the reflection model.\nVisual perception.\nThough it receives less attention, an understanding of human visual perception is valuable to rendering. This is mainly because image displays and human perception have restricted ranges. A renderer can simulate a wide range of light brightness and color, but current displays movie screen, computer monitor, etc. cannot handle so much, and something must be discarded or compressed. Human perception also has limits, and so does not need to be given large-range images to create realism. This can help solve the problem of fitting images into displays, and, furthermore, suggest what short-cuts could be used in the rendering simulation, since certain subtleties will not be noticeable. This related subject is tone mapping.\nSampling and filtering.\nOne problem that any rendering system must deal with, no matter which approach it takes, is the sampling problem. Essentially, the rendering process tries to depict a continuous function from image space to colors by using a finite number of pixels. As a consequence of the Nyquist\u2013Shannon sampling theorem (or Kotelnikov theorem), any spatial waveform that can be displayed must consist of at least two pixels, which is proportional to image resolution. In simpler terms, this expresses the idea that an image cannot display details, peaks or troughs in color or intensity, that are smaller than one pixel.\nIf a naive rendering algorithm is used without any filtering, high frequencies in the image function will cause ugly aliasing to be present in the final image. Aliasing typically manifests itself as jaggies, or jagged edges on objects where the pixel grid is visible. In order to remove aliasing, all rendering algorithms (if they are to produce good-looking images) must use some kind of low-pass filter on the image function to remove high frequencies, a process called antialiasing.\nHardware.\nRendering is usually limited by available computing power and memory bandwidth, and so specialized hardware has been developed to speed it up (\"accelerate\" it), particularly for real-time rendering. Hardware features such as a framebuffer for raster graphics are required to display the output of rendering smoothly in real time.\nHistory.\nIn the era of vector monitors (also called \"calligraphic displays\"), a display processing unit (DPU) was a dedicated CPU or coprocessor that maintained a list of visual elements and redrew them continuously on the screen by controlling an electron beam. Advanced DPUs such as Evans &amp; Sutherland's Line Drawing System-1 (and later models produced into the 1980s) incorporated 3D coordinate transformation features to accelerate rendering of wire-frame images. Evans &amp; Sutherland also made the Digistar planetarium projection system, which was a vector display that could render both stars and wire-frame graphics (the vector-based Digistar and Digistar II were used in many planetariums, and a few may still be in operation). A Digistar prototype was used for rendering 3D star fields for the film \u2013 some of the first 3D computer graphics sequences ever seen in a feature film.\nShaded 3D graphics rendering in the 1970s and early 1980s was usually implemented on general-purpose computers, such as the PDP-10 used by researchers at the University of Utah. It was difficult to speed up using specialized hardware because it involves a pipeline of complex steps, requiring data addressing, decision-making, and computation capabilities typically only provided by CPUs (although dedicated circuits for speeding up particular operations were proposed ). Supercomputers or specially designed multi-CPU computers or clusters were sometimes used for ray tracing. In 1981, James H. Clark and Marc Hannah designed the Geometry Engine, a VLSI chip for performing some of the steps of the 3D rasterization pipeline, and started the company Silicon Graphics (SGI) to commercialize this technology.\nHome computers and game consoles in the 1980s contained graphics coprocessors that were capable of scrolling and filling areas of the display, and drawing sprites and lines, though they were not useful for rendering realistic images. Towards the end of the 1980s PC graphics cards and arcade games with 3D rendering acceleration began to appear, and in the 1990s such technology became commonplace. Today, even low-power mobile processors typically incorporate 3D graphics acceleration features.\nGPUs.\nThe 3D graphics accelerators of the 1990s evolved into modern GPUs. GPUs are general-purpose processors, like CPUs, but they are designed for tasks that can be broken into many small, similar, mostly independent sub-tasks (such as rendering individual pixels) and performed in parallel. This means that a GPU can speed up any rendering algorithm that can be split into subtasks in this way, in contrast to 1990s 3D accelerators which were only designed to speed up specific rasterization algorithms and simple shading and lighting effects (although tricks could be used to perform more general computations).\nDue to their origins, GPUs typically still provide specialized hardware acceleration for some steps of a traditional 3D rasterization pipeline, including hidden surface removal using a z-buffer, and texture mapping with mipmaps, but these features are no longer always used. Recent GPUs have features to accelerate finding the intersections of rays with a bounding volume hierarchy, to help speed up all variants of ray tracing and path tracing, as well as neural network acceleration features sometimes useful for rendering.\nGPUs are usually integrated with high-bandwidth memory systems to support the read and write bandwidth requirements of high-resolution, real-time rendering, particularly when multiple passes are required to render a frame, however memory latency may be higher than on a CPU, which can be a problem if the critical path in an algorithm involves many memory accesses. GPU design accepts high latency as inevitable (in part because a large number of threads are sharing the memory bus) and attempts to \"hide\" it by efficiently switching between threads, so a different thread can be performing computations while the first thread is waiting for a read or write to complete.\nRendering algorithms will run efficiently on a GPU only if they can be implemented using small groups of threads that perform mostly the same operations. As an example of code that meets this requirement: when rendering a small square of pixels in a simple ray-traced image, all threads will likely be intersecting rays with the same object and performing the same lighting computations. For performance and architectural reasons, GPUs run groups of around 16-64 threads called \"warps\" or \"wavefronts\" in lock-step (all threads in the group are executing the same instructions at the same time). If not all threads in the group need to run particular blocks of code (due to conditions) then some threads will be idle, or the results of their computations will be discarded, causing degraded performance.\nChronology of algorithms and techniques.\nThe following is a rough timeline of frequently mentioned rendering techniques, including areas of current research. Note that even in cases where an idea was named in a specific paper, there were almost always multiple researchers or teams working in the same area (including earlier related work). When a method is first proposed it is often very inefficient, and it takes additional research and practical efforts to turn it into a useful technique.\nThe list focuses on academic research and does not include hardware. (For more history see #External links, as well as Computer graphics#History and Golden_age_of_arcade_video_games#Technology.)"}
{"id": "6605", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6605", "title": "Citric Acid cycle", "text": ""}
{"id": "6606", "revid": "39153957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6606", "title": "Cartridge", "text": "Cartridge may refer to:"}
{"id": "6607", "revid": "3096637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6607", "title": "Chaosium", "text": "Chaosium Inc. ( ) is a publisher of tabletop role-playing games established by Greg Stafford in 1975. Chaosium's major titles include \"Call of Cthulhu\", based on the horror fiction stories of H. P. Lovecraft\", RuneQuest Glorantha\", \"Pendragon\", based on Thomas Mallory's \"Le Morte d'Arthur\", and \"7th Sea\", \"swashbuckling and sorcery\" set in a fantasy 17th century Europe.\nMany of Chaosium's product lines are based upon literary sources. While Stafford himself has been described as \"one of the most decorated game designers of all time\" and \"the grand shaman of gaming\", multiple other notable game designers have written for Chaosium. These include David Conyers, Matthew Costello, Larry DiTillio, Paul Fricker, David A. Hargrave, Rob Heinsoo, Keith Herber, Jennell Jaquays, Katharine Kerr, Reiner Knizia, Charlie Krank, Robin Laws, Penelope Love, Mark Morrison, Steve Perrin, Sandy Petersen, Ken Rolston, Ken St. Andre, Jonathan Tweet, John Wick, and Lynn Willis, among others.\nHistory.\n1975\u20131980.\nGreg Stafford founded \"The Chaosium\" in 1975, deriving the name partly from his home, which was near the Oakland Coliseum, combining \"coliseum\" with \"chaos\". His purpose was to publish his first board game \"White Bear and Red Moon\" (later renamed \"Dragon Pass\"), a board game set in his fantasy world of Glorantha.\nIn 1978, Chaosium published Steve Perrin's roleplaying game \"RuneQuest\", also set in Glorantha, following up with a second edition in 1980 and various supplements over the next six years.\n1980s: Growth and licensing with Avalon Hill.\nIn 1980, the company officially incorporated as Chaosium Inc. That year, Stafford and Lynn Willis simplified the \"RuneQuest\" rules into the 16-page Basic Role-Playing (BRP). These simulationist, skill-based generic rules formed the basis of many of Chaosium's later \"d100\" RPGs, most notably \"Call of Cthulhu\", first published in 1982.\nChaosium entered into a licensing agreement with Avalon Hill in 1983 to produce a third edition of \"RuneQuest\". Avalon Hill manufactured and marketed the game, while Chaosium was responsible for acquisitions, design, development, and layout. Ken Rolston managed the line as \"Rune Czar\".\nOne of the first RPGs by a female lead designer was published by Chaosium: Kerie Campbell-Robson's 1986 release Hawkmoon. 1986 also saw the release of \"Ghostbusters\" with West End Games. Designed by Sandy Petersen, Lynn Willis, and Greg Stafford, it was the first RPG to use the dice pool mechanic. West End would also use the system as the basis of \"\" and, eventually, the D6 System.\nLate 1990s\u2013early 2010s: Financial struggle.\nIn 1996, it was prematurely reported that Chaosium had secured the rights to publish a collectible card game based on the video game Doom.\nIn 1998, following the financial failure of the collectible card game \"Mythos\", Greg Stafford resigned as Chaosium president and left the company, along with Sandy Petersen (although they both remained shareholders). Chaosium effectively split up into various successor companies, each maintaining its focus on a few of the company's products. Stafford took the rights to his game setting Glorantha, setting up the company Issaries, Inc. to continue publishing this line (later licensing it to Moon Design Publications, along with the game HeroQuest).\nLong-time employees and part-owners Charlie Krank and Lynn Willis remained at Chaosium as President and Editor-in-Chief respectively, continuing on with \"Call of Cthulhu\" as the main product line. Lynn Willis retired in 2008 due to poor health and died in 2013.\nMid 2010s: The return of Stafford and Petersen.\nProblems and delays fulfilling the Kickstarters for the 7th edition of \"Call of Cthulhu\" led Stafford and Petersen to return to active roles at Chaosium in June 2015. Charlie Krank subsequently left the company.\nLater that year at Gen Con 2015, Stafford and Petersen announced Moon Design Publications were now part of the Chaosium ownership, and the four principals of Moon Design (Rick Meints, Jeff Richard, Michael O'Brien, and Neil Robinson) had become the new Chaosium management team. Chaosium once again became the licensed publisher for \"RuneQuest\", \"HeroQuest\", and other products related to Glorantha and continued to publish the \"Call of Cthulhu\" line. Stafford served as chair of the company board and creative consultant until his death in October 2018. Since retiring from the board in 2019, Petersen has done occasional freelance work for the company, as did original RuneQuest creator Steve Perrin until his death in 2021.\nAs part of its financial reorganization, the new management closed the company office and warehouse in Hayward, California, ending Chaosium's long association with the San Francisco Bay Area. The company is now based in Ann Arbor, Michigan and uses a fulfillment house model for distribution of product.\nDelivery of the core rewards of the Call of Cthulhu 7th Edition Kickstarter finally commenced in April 2016. The new edition went on to win nine of the ten awards it was nominated for at the Gen Con 2017 ENnie Awards.\nLate 2010s to Present: Expansion.\nAfter the consolidation and reorganization of the mid-decade, the company was again poised to expand its offerings through a combination of acquisitions, new licenses, and distribution deals.\nGreg Stafford's \"King Arthur Pendragon\" and \"\" roleplaying games returned to Chaosium ownership on December 11, 2018.\nOn April 2, 2019, Chaosium acquired the rights to the \"7th Sea\" product line (both Second Edition and Khitai Kickstarters) from John Wick, including back stock of books published so far.\nOn November 30, 2019, Chaosium acquired the rights to produce a role-playing game based on Ben Aaronovitch's \"Rivers of London\" urban fantasy novels.\nIn the spring of 2020, Chaosium took over distribution of the English translations of Spanish fantasy game \"Aquelarre\" and French Ice Age roleplaying game \"W\u00fcrm\", both of which had been successfully kickstarted by Nocturnal Media. In February 2021, they added \"Upwind\", an original game kickstarted by Nocturnal Media and Biohazard Games, to that list.\nOn August 20, 2021, Chaosium acquired the rights to \"Cthulhu Britannica\" and \"World War Cthulhu\", formerly produced under license by Cubicle 7 until 2017.\nOn October 26, 2021, Moon Design Publishing announced it was forming a partnership with Black Monk Games of Poland and a new company, The Chaosium Group, was being formed to manage both.\nFiction.\nChaosium began publishing a line of non-game books (primarily fiction) in 1993. Many titles are themed around H. P. Lovecraft's Cthulhu Mythos and related topics, although the first work published was Greg Stafford's fantasy work \"King of Sartar\", set in his mythic world Glorantha.\n\"Cassilda's Song\", a 2015 anthology based on Robert W. Chambers's King in Yellow and written entirely by women, was nominated for two 2016 World Fantasy Awards.\nIn May 2017, Chaosium appointed award-winning author and editor James Lowder as executive editor of fiction. Lowder had previously served as a consultant for Chaosium, helping the company and freelancers resolve payment and contract problems with past fiction projects.\nAlthough not published by Chaosium, the ongoing \"Wild Cards\" series of superhero science fiction originated from a long-running \"Superworld\" campaign gamemastered by Game of Thrones author George R. R. Martin and his circle of fellow writers who played in his game.\nMagazines.\nThree magazines have been published by Chaosium to promote its products:\nReception.\nChaosium won the 2017 Silver Ennie Award for \"Fan\u2019s Choice for Best Publisher\"."}
{"id": "6609", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6609", "title": "Ciconiiformes", "text": ""}
{"id": "6610", "revid": "23838081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6610", "title": "Carolina Panthers", "text": "The Carolina Panthers are a professional American football team based in Charlotte, North Carolina. The Panthers compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the National Football Conference (NFC) South division. The team is headquartered in Bank of America Stadium in Uptown Charlotte, which also serves as the team's home field. The Panthers are supported throughout the Carolinas; although the team has played its home games in Charlotte since 1996, it played its home games at Memorial Stadium in Clemson, South Carolina, during its first season in 1995.\nThe Panthers were announced as the league's 29th franchise in 1993 and began play in 1995 under founding owner Jerry Richardson. The Panthers played well in their first two years, finishing in 1995 (an all-time best record for an NFL expansion team's first season) and 12\u20134 the following year, winning the NFC West before ultimately losing to the eventual Super Bowl champion Green Bay Packers in the NFC Championship Game. They did not have another winning season until 2003 when they won the NFC Championship Game and reached Super Bowl XXXVIII, losing 32\u201329 to the New England Patriots. After recording playoff appearances in 2005 and 2008, the team failed to make another playoff appearance until 2013, the first of three consecutive NFC South titles. After losing in the divisional round to the San Francisco 49ers in 2013 and the Seattle Seahawks in 2014, the Panthers returned to the Super Bowl in 2015 but lost to the Denver Broncos. Since then, the team has appeared in the playoffs only once, in 2017. The team's five NFC South titles since the division's establishment in 2002 rank second only to the New Orleans Saints.\nThe franchise is legally registered as Panther Football, LLC and are controlled by David Tepper, whose purchase of the team from founder Jerry Richardson was unanimously approved by league owners on May 22, 2018. The club, which \"Forbes\" valued at approximately US$2.3\u00a0billion in 2018, is estimated at $4.1 billion by it in 2023.\nHistory.\nBeginnings.\nOn December 15, 1987, entrepreneur Jerry Richardson announced his bid for an NFL expansion franchise in the Carolinas. A North Carolina native, Richardson was a former wide receiver on the Baltimore Colts who had used his 1959 league championship bonus to co-franchise the first Hardee's restaurant in Spartanburg, SC, eventually expanding to a chain of franchises as co-founder of Spartan Food Systems before becoming president and CEO of Flagstar. Richardson drew his inspiration to pursue an NFL franchise from George Shinn, who had made a successful bid for an expansion National Basketball Association (NBA) team in Charlotte, the Charlotte Hornets. Richardson founded Richardson Sports, a partnership consisting of himself, his family, and a number of businessmen from North and South Carolina who were also recruited to be limited partners. Richardson looked at four potential locations for a stadium, ultimately choosing uptown Charlotte.\nTo highlight the demand for professional football in the Carolinas, Richardson Sports held preseason games around the area from 1989 to 1991. The first two games were held at Carter\u2013Finley Stadium in Raleigh, North Carolina, and Kenan Memorial Stadium in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, while the third and final game was held at Williams-Brice Stadium in Columbia, South Carolina. The matchups were between existing NFL teams. In 1991, the group formally filed an application for the open expansion spot, and on October 26, 1993, the 28 NFL owners unanimously named the Carolina Panthers as the 29th member of the NFL. In the 1995 NFL draft, the Panthers selected quarterback Kerry Collins out of Penn State with their first ever draft selection.\nJerry Richardson era (1995\u20132017).\nThe Panthers first competed in the 1995 NFL season; they were one of two expansion teams to begin playing that year, the other being the Jacksonville Jaguars. The Panthers were put in the NFC West to increase the size of that division to five teams; there were already two other southeastern teams in the division, the Atlanta Falcons and the New Orleans Saints. Former Pittsburgh Steelers defensive coordinator Dom Capers was named the first head coach. The Panthers played their first regular season game in Week 1 of the 1995 season. The team fell to the Atlanta Falcons 23\u201320 in overtime. After a 0\u20135 start, with three close losses, the Panthers won their first game in franchise history, a 26\u201315 win over the New York Jets. The team finished its inaugural season , the best performance ever from a first-year expansion team. They performed even better in their second season, finishing with a record and winning the NFC West division, as well as securing a first-round bye. The Panthers beat the defending Super Bowl champions Dallas Cowboys in the divisional round 26\u201317 before losing the NFC Championship Game to the eventual Super Bowl champions, the Green Bay Packers 30\u201313. The team managed only a finish in 1997 and slipped to in 1998, leading to Capers' dismissal as head coach.\nThe Panthers hired former San Francisco 49ers head coach George Seifert to replace Capers, and he led the team to an record in 1999. The team finished in 2000 and fell to in 2001, winning their first game but losing their last 15. This performance tied the NFL record for most losses in a single season, and it broke the record held by the winless 1976 Buccaneers for most consecutive losses in a single season (both records have since been broken by the 2008 Lions), leading the Panthers to fire Seifert. One highlight from the loss-ridden 2001 season was the drafting of future franchise wide receiver Steve Smith. He was a third-round selection in the 2001 NFL draft by the team.\nJohn Fox years (2002\u20132010).\nAfter the NFL's expansion to 32 teams in 2002, the Panthers were relocated from the NFC West to the newly created NFC South division. The Panthers' rivalries with the Falcons and Saints were maintained, and they would be joined by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. The Panthers had the second overall pick in the 2002 NFL Draft. The team selected future Hall of Fame defensive end Julius Peppers out of North Carolina. New York Giants defensive coordinator John Fox was hired to replace Seifert and led the team to a finish in 2002. Although the team's defense gave up very few yards, ranking the second-best in the NFL in yards conceded, they were hindered by an offense that ranked as the second-worst in the league in yards gained.\nPrior to the 2003 season, the team signed quarterback Jake Delhomme. The Panthers improved to in the 2003 regular season, winning the NFC South. The Panthers defeated the Dallas Cowboys 29\u201310 in the Wild Card Round, the St. Louis Rams 29\u201323 in the Divisional Round, and the Philadelphia Eagles 14\u20133 in the NFC Championship. They advanced to Super Bowl XXXVIII before losing to the New England Patriots, 32\u201329. The game was immediately hailed by sportswriter Peter King as the \"Greatest Super Bowl of all time\". King felt the game \"was a wonderful championship battle, full of everything that makes football dramatic, draining, enervating, maddening, fantastic, exciting\" and praised, among other things, the unpredictability, coaching, and conclusion. The game is still viewed as one of the best Super Bowls of all time, and in the opinion of Charlotte-based NPR reporter Scott Jagow, the Panthers' Super Bowl appearance represented the arrival of Charlotte onto the national scene.\nFollowing a start in 2004, the Panthers rebounded to win six of their last seven games despite losing 14 players for the season due to injury. They lost their last game to New Orleans, finishing the 2004 season at . Had they won the game, the Panthers would have made the playoffs. The team improved to in 2005, finishing second in the division behind Tampa Bay and clinching a playoff berth as a wild card. In the first round of the playoffs, the Panthers went on the road to face the New York Giants, beating them 23\u20130 for the NFL's first playoff shutout against a home team since 1980. The following week, they beat Chicago 29\u201321 on the road, but lost key players Julius Peppers, a defensive end, and DeShaun Foster, a running back, who were both injured during the game. The Panthers were then defeated 34\u201314 by the Seattle Seahawks in the NFC Championship Game, ending their season. Although the Panthers went into the 2006 season as favorites to win the NFC South and the free agent signing of Keyshawn Johnson, they finished with a disappointing record. The team finished the 2007 season with a record after losing quarterback Jake Delhomme early in the season due to an elbow injury.\nIn 2008, the Panthers rebounded with a regular season record, winning the NFC South and securing a first round bye. They were eliminated in the divisional round of the playoffs, losing 33\u201313 to the eventual NFC Champion Arizona Cardinals after Delhomme turned the ball over six times. Delhomme's struggles carried over into the 2009 season, where he threw 18 interceptions in the first 11 games before breaking a finger in his throwing hand. The Panthers were at a record before Delhomme's season-ending injury, and his backup, Matt Moore, led the team to a finish to the season for an overall record. In 2010, after releasing Delhomme in the offseason, the Panthers finished with a league-worst () record; their offense was the worst in the league. John Fox's contract expired after the season ended, and the team did not retain him or his staff.\nRon Rivera years (2011\u20132019).\nThe team hired Ron Rivera to replace Fox as head coach and drafted Auburn's Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback Cam Newton with the first overall pick in the 2011 NFL draft. The Panthers opened the 2011 season , but finished with a record, and Newton was awarded the AP Offensive Rookie of the Year award after setting the NFL record for most rushing touchdowns from a quarterback (14) in a single season and becoming the first rookie NFL quarterback to throw for over 4,000\u00a0yards in a single season, thus setting the NFL rookie record. He also was the first rookie quarterback to rush for over 500\u00a0yards in a single season. \nAfter strengthening the defense with future all-pro Luke Kuechly in the first round of the 2012 draft, the Panthers again opened the 2012 season poorly, losing five out of their first six games, leading longtime general manager Marty Hurney to be fired in response. The team slid to a record before winning five of their last six games, resulting in a record. This strong finish helped save Rivera's job. \nThe Panthers had a winning season the following year, finishing with a record and winning their third NFC South title and another playoff bye, but they were beaten by the 49ers in the Divisional Round. In 2014, the Panthers opened the season with two wins, but after 12 games, sat at due in part to a seven-game winless streak. A four-game winning streak to end the season secured the team their second consecutive NFC South championship and a playoff berth, despite a losing record of . The Panthers defeated the Arizona Cardinals, 27\u201316, in the wild card round to advance to the divisional playoffs, where they lost to eventual NFC champion Seattle, 31\u201317. The 2015 season saw the Panthers start the season and finish the season , which tied for the best regular-season record in NFC history. The team had the league's top-scoring offense. During the same season, Cam Newton was named NFL MVP. The Panthers also secured their third consecutive NFC South championship, as well as their first overall top-seeded playoff berth. In the 2015\u201316 playoffs, the Panthers defeated the Seattle Seahawks in the NFC Divisional playoffs, 31\u201324, after shutting them out in the first half, 31\u20130, and the Arizona Cardinals, 49\u201315, in the NFC Championship Game to advance to Super Bowl 50, their first Super Bowl appearance since the 2003 season. The Panthers lost a defensive struggle to the AFC champion Denver Broncos, 24\u201310. In the 2016 season, the Panthers regressed on their 15\u20131 record from 2015, posting a 6\u201310 record and a last-place finish in the NFC South, missing the playoffs for the first time since 2012, and losing the division title to the second-seeded Falcons, who went on to represent the NFC in Super Bowl LI. In 2017, the Panthers finished with an 11\u20135 record and a #5 seed. However, they lost to the New Orleans Saints 31\u201326 in the Wild Card Round, their first loss in that round in franchise history.\nDavid Tepper era (2018\u2013present).\nOn May 16, 2018, David Tepper, formerly a minority owner of the Pittsburgh Steelers, finalized an agreement to purchase the Panthers. The sale price was nearly $2.3 billion, a record. The agreement was approved by the league owners on May 22, 2018. The sale officially closed on July 9, 2018. After starting 6\u20132, the Panthers finished the 2018 season 7\u20139. They began the 2019 season 5\u20133 but lost the last eight games to finish 5\u201311; late in the season, Tepper fired Rivera as head coach. Perry Fewell finished the season as interim coach, going 0\u20134. The 2019 season was marred with a season-ending injury to Cam Newton, who only played in two games that year. The Panthers turned to Kyle Allen and Will Grier at quarterback after Newton was out.\nMatt Rhule years (2020\u20132022).\nOn January 7, 2020, the Panthers hired Baylor head coach Matt Rhule as head coach. On January 15, 2020, Luke Kuechly announced his retirement from the league. On March 17, 2020, the Panthers signed Teddy Bridgewater to a three-year $63 million contract. On March 24, the Carolina Panthers released their 2011 first overall pick and 2015 MVP quarterback Cam Newton. The Panthers had a difficult 2020 season, losing several close games. They would finish 5\u201311 for the second straight year.\nFollowing the season, the Panthers traded for Sam Darnold from the New York Jets and shipped Bridgewater to the Denver Broncos. On November 11, 2021, the Panthers signed Cam Newton to a one-year deal after Darnold was put on injured reserve. However, the Panthers' struggles continued; despite winning their first three games of the 2021 season, they finished 5\u201312 and ended the season on a seven-game losing streak.\nAfter the Panthers began the season with a 1\u20134 record, Rhule was fired as head coach on October 10, 2022, finishing his tenure with an 11\u201327 record in two and a half seasons. Steve Wilks was named interim head coach as a result. The Panthers then initiated a rebuild, trading players such as Robbie Anderson and Christian McCaffrey. Steve Wilks would go 6\u20136 as the interim head coach, as the Panthers would finish the season with a 7\u201310 record.\nFrank Reich year (2023).\nOn January 26, 2023, former Indianapolis Colts head coach Frank Reich was hired as head coach. Reich was the first starting QB in Panthers history in 1995. Prior to the draft, the Panthers traded with the Chicago Bears to move up to the first overall pick. The trade involved Carolina swapping spots with the Bears and giving up their 2023 second-round pick, 2024 first-round pick, 2025 second-round pick, and wide receiver D. J. Moore. In the 2023 NFL draft, Reich's first and only as the Panthers head coach, the Panthers selected their potential franchise quarterback in Heisman Trophy winner Bryce Young out of Alabama with the first overall pick.\nOn November 27, 2023, Reich was fired after a 1\u201310 start. Special teams coordinator Chris Tabor coached the remainder of the 2023 season, going 1\u20135 in those games as the Panthers finished with a league-worst 2\u201315 record.\nDave Canales (2024).\nOn January 25, 2024, former Tampa Bay Buccaneers offensive coordinator Dave Canales was hired as head coach. In the first regular season game of the season, the Panthers lost to the New Orleans saints with a score of 10\u201347 with Bryce Young registering 13 completions from 30 attempts and being intercepted twice.\nLogo and uniforms.\nLogo.\nThe shape of the Panthers logo was designed to mimic the outline of both North Carolina and South Carolina. The Panthers changed their logo and logotype in 2012, the first such change in team history. According to the team, the changes were designed to give their logo an \"aggressive, contemporary look\" as well as to give it a more three-dimensional feel. The primary tweaks were made in the eye and mouth, where the features, particularly the muscular brow and fangs, are more pronounced, creating a more menacing look. The revised logo has a darker shade of blue over the black logo, compared to the old design, which had a shade similar to teal on top of black.\nUniforms.\nBy the time they had been announced as the 29th NFL team in October 1993, the Panthers' logo and helmet design had already been finalized, but the uniform design was still under creation. After discussion, the Panthers organization decided on jerseys colored white, black, and blue and pants colored white and silver. The exact tone of blue, which they decided would be \"process blue\" (a shade lighter than Duke's and darker than North Carolina's), was the most difficult color to choose.\nThe team's uniform has remained largely the same since its creation, with only minor alterations, such as changing the sock color of the team's black uniforms from blue to black and changing the team's shoes from white to black. Richardson, a self-described traditionalist, said that no major uniform changes would be made in his lifetime.\nThe Panthers have three main jersey colors: black, white, and blue. Their blue jerseys, designated their alternate uniforms, are the newest and were introduced in 2002. NFL regulations allow the team to use the blue jersey up to two times in any given season. In all other games, the team must wear either their white or black jerseys; in NFL games, the home team decides whether to wear a dark or white jersey, while the away team wears the opposite. Usually the Panthers opt for white or blue when the weather is expected to be hot and for black when the weather is expected to be cold.\nThe Panthers typically pair their white jerseys with white pants and blue socks, while the black and blue jerseys are paired with silver pants and black socks; there have only been a few exceptions to these combinations.\nThe first such instance was in 1998 when the team paired their white jerseys with silver pants in a game against the Indianapolis Colts. The second instance was in 2012 during a game against the Denver Broncos when they paired their black jerseys with new black pants; this created an all-black uniform, with the exception of blue socks and silver helmets. The decision to wear blue socks was made by team captain Steve Smith, who felt the blue socks gave the uniforms a more distinct appearance compared with other teams that have all-black uniforms. The all-black uniforms won the \"Greatest Uniform in NFL History\" contest, a fan-voted contest run by NFL.com in July 2013. In July 2013, the team's equipment manager, Jackie Miles, said the Panthers intended to use the all-black uniform more in the future. The Panthers wore the all-black uniform three times the following season, once each in the preseason and regular season, and the third time during the home divisional round playoff game vs the 49ers. During the Panthers' 2015 Thanksgiving Day game against the Dallas Cowboys, they debuted an all-blue uniform as part of Nike's \"Color Rush\" series.\nThe team's uniform did not change significantly after Nike became the NFL's jersey supplier in 2012, but the collar was altered to honor former Panthers player and coach Sam Mills by featuring the phrase \"Keep Pounding\". Nike had conceived the idea, and the team supported the concept as a way to expose newer fans to the legacy of Mills, who died of cancer in 2005. Mills had introduced the phrase, which has since become a team slogan, in a speech that he gave to the players and coaches prior to their 2003 playoff game against Dallas; in the speech, Mills compared his fight against cancer with the team's on-field battle, saying \"When I found out I had cancer, there were two things I could do \u2013 quit or keep pounding. I'm a fighter. I kept pounding. You're fighters, too. Keep pounding!\"\nIn 2019, the Panthers unveiled new uniforms. The new uniforms are Nike's \"Vapor Untouchable\" and have only minor differences: the tapered strips on the pants are replaced by stripes that extend down to the socks, the reflective shoulder cloth was replaced and the hip logos were also removed. The uniforms keep the same basic look, colors, and numbers as the originals.\nIn 2022, after the NFL reinstated the use of alternate helmets, the Panthers unveiled secondary black helmets, which featured no white elements on the team logo.\nStadium and practice facilities.\nThe Panthers played their first season at Memorial Stadium in Clemson, South Carolina, as their facility in uptown Charlotte was still under construction. Ericsson Stadium, called Bank of America Stadium since 2004, opened in the summer of 1996. The stadium was specially designed by HOK Sports Facilities Group for football and also serves as the headquarters and administrative offices of the Panthers. On some days, the stadium offers public tours for a fee. Private tours for groups are offered for a fee seven days a week, though there are some exceptions, and such tours must be arranged in advance.\nTwo bronze panther statues flank each of the stadium's three main entrances; they are the largest sculptures ever commissioned in the United States. The names of the team's original PSL owners are engraved on the base of each statue. The first two people in the Panthers Hall of Honor, team executive Mike McCormack and linebacker Sam Mills, are honored with life-sized bronze statues outside the stadium. Mills, in addition to being the only player in the Hall of Honor for over 20 years, is the only player to have had his jersey number (#51) retired by the Panthers .\nThe Panthers have three open-air fields next to Bank of America Stadium where they currently hold their practices; during the 1995 season, when the team played their home games in South Carolina, the team held their practices at Winthrop University in Rock Hill, South Carolina. Because the practice fields, along with the stadium, are located in uptown Charlotte, the fields are directly visible from skyscrapers as well as from a four-story condominium located across the street. According to Mike Cranston, a running joke said that the Panthers' division rivals had pooled their resources to purchase a room on the building's top floor and that a fire at the condominium was caused by the Panthers organization. In order to prevent people from seeing inside the field while the team is practicing, the team has added \"strategically planted trees and a tarp over the\u00a0... fence surrounding the fields\". Additionally, they employ a security team to watch for and chase away any people who stop alongside the fence surrounding the field. In the event of bad weather, the team moves their practices to an indoor sports facility about from the stadium. The team does not own this facility. The Panthers have hosted their annual training camp at Wofford College in Spartanburg, South Carolina, since 1995.\nTeam Headquarters.\nThe Panthers were planning on building a $1 billion team headquarters and training facility on a in Rock Hill, South Carolina, nicknamed \"The Rock\". After six months of discussions and state approval of $115 million in incentives, the formal announcement of the team's plan for a new practice facility came on June 5, 2019. Rock Hill mayor John Gettys described the project at that time as the biggest in the city's history. Groundbreaking took place in July 2019, and it was expected to be completed by summer 2023. The agreement with Rock Hill, however, ended up being terminated on April 19, 2022, with owner David Tepper filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy.\nCulture.\nThe Panthers are supported in both North Carolina and South Carolina; South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley declared July 30, 2012, \"Carolina Panthers Day\" in her state, saying that \"when it comes to professional teams, the Carolina Panthers are the team that South Carolina calls their own\". During the 2015 NFC Championship and Super Bowl, the hashtag #OneCarolina was used by college and professional sports teams from North Carolina and South Carolina to show unified support for the Panthers.\n\"Sports Illustrated\" graded the Panthers as having the 10th highest \"NFL Fan Value Experience\" in 2007, attributing much of the fan atmosphere to the team's newness when compared to the established basketball fanbase. They also observed that the stadium has scattered parking lots, each of which has a different tailgating style. Some have fried chicken, pork, or Carolina-style barbecue, while others have live bands and televisions. Pickup football games in the parking lots are common. The Carolina Panthers have a home stadium capacity of just under 75,000, with home attendance ranking in the NFL's top ten since 2006.\nMascot, cheerleaders, and drumline.\nSir Purr, an anthropomorphic black panther who wears a jersey numbered '00', has been the Panthers' mascot since their first season. During games, Sir Purr provides sideline entertainment through skits and \"silly antics\". The mascot participates in a number of community events year-round, including a monthly visit to the patients at Levine Children's Hospital. Sir Purr also hosts the annual Mascot Bowl, an event which pits pro and college mascots against each other during halftime at a selected Panthers home game.\nThe team's cheerleaders are the Carolina Topcats who lead cheers and entertain fans at home games. The TopCats participate in both corporate and charity events. In March 2022, the Carolina Topcats became the first NFL cheerleading team to have a transgender member, Justine Lindsay. The team's drumline is PurrCussion, an ensemble of snare, tenor, and bass drummers as well as cymbal players. PurrCussion performs for fans outside the stadium and introduces players prior to home games; it consists of drummers from across the Carolinas.\nKeep Pounding Drum.\nStarting with the 2012 season, the Panthers introduced the Keep Pounding Drum, inspired by the aforementioned motivational speech by Sam Mills before the team's 2004 playoff game against the Cowboys. Prior to each home game, an honorary drummer hits the six-foot-tall drum four times to signify the four quarters of an American football game. According to the team, the drummers \"come from a variety of backgrounds and occupations, but all have overcome a great trial or adversity that has not only made them strong but also pushes them to make others around them stronger\". Drummers have included current and former Panthers players, military veterans, Make-A-Wish children, and athletes from other sports, including NBA MVP and Charlotte native Stephen Curry, US women's national soccer team players Whitney Engen and Heather O'Reilly, and 7 time NASCAR Cup Series champion Jimmie Johnson.\nSongs and traditions.\nDuring the inaugural season of the Panthers, the team had an official fight song, which the team played before each home game. The song, \"Stand and Cheer\", remains the team's official fight song, but the team does not typically play it before home games. Due to negative fan reaction \"Stand and Cheer\" was pulled in 1999. Since 2006, the song has returned. The team plays Neil Diamond's \"Sweet Caroline\" after home victories.\nA \"keep pounding\" chant was introduced during the 2012 season which starts before the opening kickoff of each home game. As prompted by the video boards, one side of the stadium shouts \"keep\" and the other side replies with \"pounding\". The chant is similar to ones that take place at college football games.\nCharity and community work.\nThe Carolina Panthers support a variety of non-profits in North and South Carolina through the Carolina Panthers Charities. Four annual scholarships are awarded to student athletes through the Carolina Panthers Graduate Scholarship and the Carolina Panthers Players Sam Mills Memorial Scholarship programs. Carolina Panthers Charities also offers grants to non-profits that support education, athletics, and human services in the community. The Panthers and Fisher Athletic have provided six equipment grants to high school football teams in the Carolinas each year since 2010. Carolina Panthers Charities raises funds at three annual benefits: the Countdown to Kickoff Luncheon, the team's first public event each season; Football 101, an educational workshop for fans; and the Weekend Warrior Flag Football Tournament, a two-day non-contact flag football tournament. Another annual benefit is Taste of the Panthers, a gourmet food tasting which raises funds for Second Harvest Food Bank of Metrolina.\nIn 2003 the Panthers and Carolinas HealthCare Foundation established the Keep Pounding Fund, a fundraising initiative to support cancer research and patient support programs. The Panthers community has raised more than $1.4 million for the fund through direct donations, charity auctions, blood drives, and an annual 5k stadium run. The Panthers and Levine Children's Hospital coordinate monthly hospital visits and VIP game-day experiences for terminally ill or hospitalized children.\nIn addition to these team-specific efforts, the Panthers participate in a number of regular initiatives promoted by the NFL and USA Football, the league's youth football development partner. These include USA Football Month, held throughout August to encourage and promote youth football; A Crucial Catch, the league's Breast Cancer Awareness Month program; Salute to Service, held throughout November to support military families and personnel; and PLAY 60, which encourages young NFL fans to be active for at least 60 minutes each day.\nRadio and television.\nRadio coverage is provided by flagship station WRFX and through the Carolina Panthers Radio Network, with affiliates throughout the Carolinas and Virginia. The Panthers' radio broadcasting team is led by play-by-play voice Anish Shroff, with Jake Delhomme as color analyst, and WBT sports director Jim Szoke as studio host. The radio network broadcasts pre-game coverage, games with commentary, and post-game wrap-ups. It also live-broadcasts \"Panther Talk\", a weekly event at Bank of America Stadium which offers fans a chance to meet a player and ask questions of the staff.\nNational broadcasting and cable television networks cover regular-season games, as well as some preseason games. Locally, Fox affiliate WJZY airs most regular-season games, while home games against an AFC team typically air on CBS affiliate WBTV. Any appearances on Monday Night Football are simulcast on ABC affiliate WSOC-TV, while any appearances on Thursday Night Football are simulcast on WSOC. Sunday night and some Thursday night games are aired on NBC affiliate WCNC-TV.\nAll preseason games and team specials are televised by the Carolina Panthers Television Network on flagship station WSOC-TV in Charlotte and fourteen affiliate stations throughout the Carolinas, Georgia, Virginia, and Tennessee. WSOC took over as the Panthers' television partner for the 2019 season, replacing longtime television partner WCCB, which had retained this role after losing the Fox affiliation to WJZY in 2013. As of 2021, the preseason television broadcasting team consists of play-by-play commentator Taylor Zarzour, color analyst and former Panthers player Steve Smith, and sideline reporter Kristen Balboni. The network also hosts \"The Panthers Huddle\", a weekly show focusing on the Panthers' upcoming opponent.\nThe Panthers also offer game broadcasts in Spanish throughout both Carolinas and Mexico, with Jaime Moreno and To\u00f1o Ramos providing commentary.\nRivalries.\nThe Panthers have developed heated rivalries with the three fellow members of the NFC South (the Atlanta Falcons, Tampa Bay Buccaneers, and New Orleans Saints). The team's fiercest rivals are the Falcons and Buccaneers.\nThe Falcons are a natural geographic rival for the Panthers, as Atlanta is only south on I-85. The two teams have played each other twice a year since the Panthers' inception, and games between the two teams feature large numbers of the visiting team's fans. As of the 2023 season, the Falcons lead the all-time series 36\u201322. The teams have never met in the postseason.\nThe Panthers' rivalry with Tampa Bay has been described as the most intense in the NFC South. The rivalry originated in 2002 with the formation of the NFC South, but became particularly heated before the 2003 season with verbal bouts between players on the two teams. It escalated further when the Panthers went to Tampa Bay and beat them in what ESPN.com writer Pat Yasinskas described as \"one of the most physical contests in recent memory\". The rivalry has resulted in a number of severe injuries for players on both teams, some of which were caused by foul play. One of these plays, an illegal hit on Tampa Bay punt returner Clifton Smith, sparked a brief melee between the teams in 2009. As of 2023, the Panthers lead the all-time series 25\u201322. The two teams have never met in the postseason.\nAs of the 2023 season, the Saints lead the all-time series against the Panthers 31\u201328. The teams faced off in their lone postseason meeting in the 2017\u201318 postseason in the Wild Card Round with the Saints being victorious 31\u201326.\nPlayers.\nHall of Honor.\nThe Carolina Panthers Hall of Honor was established in 1997 to honor individuals for their contributions to the Carolina Panthers organization.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Carolina Panthers have retired one number.\nPro Football Hall of Fame enshrinees.\nNominees for the Pro Football Hall of Fame, which \"honor[s] individuals who have made outstanding contributions to professional football\", are determined by a 46-member selection committee. At least 80% of voters must approve the nominee for him to be inducted.\nOwnership and Administration.\nJerry Richardson.\nJerry Richardson was the founder and first owner of the Carolina Panthers. Richardson and his family owned about 48% of the team, with the remaining 52% owned by a group of 14 limited partners. Richardson and the other investors paid $206\u00a0million for the rights to start the team in 1993.\nTeam President.\nMike McCormack, a Hall of Fame lineman for the Cleveland Browns and former coach and executive for the Seattle Seahawks, was the Panthers' first team president, presiding in that role from 1994 until his retirement in 1997; McCormack was inducted as the first person in the Carolina Panthers Hall of Honor later that year. Jerry Richardson's son, Mark, was appointed as the team's second president in 1997 and served in that role until he stepped down in 2009. His brother Jon, who had been president of Bank of America Stadium, stepped down at the same time. The resignations of Mark and Jon Richardson were unexpected, as it was thought that the two would eventually take over the team from their father. Mark Richardson was replaced by Danny Morrison, who had previously served as the athletic director of both Texas Christian University and Wofford College, Richardson's alma mater. Morrison resigned in early 2017. The role was vacant until August 2018, when Tom Glick was hired as team president. He had previously served as the COO of Manchester City.\nDavid Tepper.\nOn May 16, 2018, David Tepper, formerly a minority owner of the Pittsburgh Steelers, finalized an agreement to purchase the Carolina Panthers, for nearly $2.3 billion, a record at the time. The agreement was approved by the league owners on May 22, 2018. According to \"Forbes\", the Panthers are worth approximately $2.3\u00a0billion . They ranked the Carolina Panthers as the 21st-most valuable NFL team and the 36th-most valuable sports team in the world.\nCoaches.\nThe Carolina Panthers have had ten head coaches. Eight have served in official capacity with two being interim coaches. Dom Capers was the head coach from 1995 to 1998 and led the team to one playoff appearance. Counting playoff games, he finished with a record of 31\u201335 (.470). George Seifert coached the team from 1999 to 2001, recording 16 wins and 32 losses (.333). John Fox, the team's longest-tenured head coach, led the team from 2002 to 2010 and coached the team to three playoff appearances including Super Bowl XXXVIII which the Panthers lost. Including playoff games, Fox ended his tenure with a 78\u201374 (.513) record, making him the first Panthers coach to finish his tenure with the team with a winning record. Ron Rivera held the position from 2011 to 2019 and led the team to four playoff appearances including Super Bowl 50. Counting playoff games, he has a career record of 79\u201367\u20131 (.541). Statistically, Rivera holds the highest winning percentage of any Panthers head coach. On December 3, 2019, following a home loss against the Washington Redskins that sent the team's record to 5\u20137, Rivera was fired by David Tepper. Perry Fewell, then the defensive backs coach for the team, was named interim head coach the same day. On January 7, 2020, Matt Rhule was hired to be the Panthers head coach. Rhule was fired during his third season, with Steve Wilks taking over on an interim basis. Frank Reich was hired head coach on January 26, 2023. Frank Reich was let go as head coach on November 27, 2023. Dave Canales was hired as head coach on January 25, 2024.\nTeam records.\nSince they began playing football in 1995, the Panthers have been to four NFC Championship Games; they lost two (1996 and 2005) and won two (2003 and 2015). The Panthers have won six division championships: the NFC West championship in 1996 and the NFC South championship in 2003, 2008, 2013, 2014, and 2015. They have finished as runners-up in their division six times, finishing second-place in the NFC West in 1997 and 1999 and finishing second-place in the NFC South in 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2012. They have qualified for the playoffs 8 times, most recently in 2017.\nKicker John Kasay is the team's career points leader. Kasay scored 1,482 points during his 16 seasons (1995\u20132010) with the Panthers. Quarterback Cam Newton is the Panthers' career passing leader; he threw for 29,041 yards over his nine seasons with the team (2011\u20132020). Running back Jonathan Stewart is the career rushing leader for the Carolina Panthers. Stewart, during his tenure with the team (2008\u20132018), rushed for 6,868 yards with the Panthers. Wide receiver Steve Smith, the team's leading receiver, recorded 12,197 receiving yards during his 13-year (2001\u20132013) tenure with the team.\nReferences.\nNotes\nFootnotes"}
{"id": "6611", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6611", "title": "Chicago Bears", "text": "The Chicago Bears are a professional American football team based in Chicago. The Bears compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the National Football Conference (NFC) North division. The Bears have won nine NFL Championships, eight prior to the AFL\u2013NFL merger and one Super Bowl. They also hold the NFL records for the most enshrinees in the Pro Football Hall of Fame and the most retired jersey numbers. The Bears' NFL championships and overall victories are second behind the Green Bay Packers, with whom they have a long-standing rivalry.\nThe franchise was founded in Decatur, Illinois, on September 20, 1919, became professional on September 17, 1920, and moved to Chicago in 1921. It is one of two remaining franchises from the NFL founding in 1920, along with the Arizona Cardinals, which began in Chicago. The team played home games at Wrigley Field on Chicago's North Side through the 1970 season; they have played since then at Soldier Field on the Near South Side, adjacent to Lake Michigan.\nThe team headquarters, Halas Hall, is in the Chicago suburb of Lake Forest, Illinois. The Bears practice at adjoining facilities there during the season, and began hosting training camp at Halas Hall in 2020 after major renovations.\nHistory.\n1919\u20131939: Early Bears.\nOriginally named the Decatur Staleys, the club was established by the A. E. Staley food starch company of Decatur, Illinois, as a company team. This was the typical start for several early professional football franchises. The team played independently in 1919, winning the Central Illinois Championship. The company hired George Halas and Edward \"Dutch\" Sternaman in 1920 to run the team. The 1920 Decatur Staleys season was their inaugural regular season completed in the newly formed American Professional Football Association (later renamed the National Football League (NFL) in 1922).\nFull control of the team was turned over to Halas and Sternaman in 1921. Official team and league records cite Halas as the founder as he took over the team in 1920 when it became a charter member of the NFL.\nThe team moved to Chicago in 1921, where the club was renamed the Chicago Staleys; Under an agreement reached by Halas and Sternaman with Staley, they received US$5,000 to keep the name \"Staleys\" for the 1921 season.\nIn 1922, Halas changed the team name from the Staleys to the Bears. The team moved into Wrigley Field, home of the Chicago Cubs baseball franchise. As with several early NFL franchises, the Bears derived their nickname from their city's baseball team (bears' young are called \"cubs\"). Halas liked the bright orange-and-blue colors of his alma mater, the University of Illinois, and the Bears adopted those colors as their own, albeit in a darker shade of each (the blue is Pantone 5395, navy blue, and the orange is Pantone 1665, similar to burnt orange).\nThe Staleys/Bears dominated the league in the early years. Their rivalry with the Chicago Cardinals, the oldest in the NFL (and a crosstown rival from 1920 to 1959), was key in four out of the first six league titles. During the league's first six years, the Bears lost twice to the Canton Bulldogs (who took two league titles over that span), and split with their crosstown rival Cardinals (going 4\u20134\u20132 against each other over that span), but no other team in the league defeated the Bears more than a single time. During that span, the Bears posted 34 shutouts.\nThe Bears' rivalry with the Green Bay Packers is one of the oldest and most storied in American professional sports, dating back to 1921 (the Green Bay Packers were an independent team until they joined the NFL in 1921). In one infamous incident that year, Halas got the Packers expelled from the league in order to prevent their signing a particular player, and then graciously got them re-admitted after the Bears had closed the deal with that player.\nThe franchise was an early success under Halas, capturing the NFL Championship in and remaining competitive throughout the decade. In 1924 the Bears claimed the Championship after defeating the Cleveland Bulldogs on December 7, even putting the title \"World's Champions\" on their 1924 team photo. But the NFL had ruled that games after November 30 did not count towards league standings, and the Bears had to settle for second place behind Cleveland. Their only losing season came in .\nDuring the 1920s the club was responsible for triggering the NFL's long-standing rule that a player could not be signed until his college's senior class had graduated. The NFL took that action as a consequence of the Bears' aggressive signing of famous University of Illinois player Red Grange within a day of his final game as a collegian.\nDespite much of the on-field success, the Bears were a team in trouble. They faced the problem of increased operating costs and flatlined attendance. The Bears would only draw roughly 5,000\u20136,000 fans a game, while a University of Chicago game would draw 40,000\u201350,000 fans a game. By adding top college football draw Red Grange to the roster, the Bears knew that they found something to draw more fans to their games. C.C. Pyle was able to secure a $2,000 per game contract for Grange, and in one of the first games, the Bears defeated the Green Bay Packers, 21\u20130. However, Grange remained on the sidelines while learning the team's plays from Bears quarterback Joey Sternaman. Later in 1925, The Bears would go on a barnstorming tour, showing off the best football player of the day. 75,000 people paid to see Grange lead the Bears to a 17\u20137 victory over the Los Angeles Tigers, who were a quickly put together team of West Coast college all-stars. After a loss to San Francisco, the Bears cruised to a 60\u20133 over a semi-pro team called the Portland All Stars.\nAny hopes that Grange would lead the Bears to glory in 1926 were quickly dashed. A failed contract talk led to Grange bolting to the AFL's New York Yankees, owned by Pyle. The Bears also lost star quarterback Joey Sternaman, who joined the Chicago Bulls of the AFL. The Bears replaced Grange with Paddy Driscoll, a star football player in his own right. The Bears used the money made from the Grange barn-storming tour to sign the man that replaced him. Grange split his time between making movies and playing football. However, the time was not right to have two competing pro football leagues, and the AFL folded after only one season. Grange would return to the Bears.\nAfter the financial losses of the Championship season, Halas' partner Dutch Sternaman left the organization. Halas maintained full control of the Bears until his death in 1983. He also coached the team off-and-on for forty seasons, an NFL record. In the 1932 \"Unofficial\" NFL Championship, the Bears defeated the Portsmouth Spartans in the first NFL playoff game. Due to blizzard conditions in Chicago, the game was played at Chicago Stadium, marking it as the first indoor American football game.\nThe success of the playoff game led the NFL to institute a championship game. In the first NFL Championship, the Bears played against the New York Giants, defeating them 23\u201321. The teams met again in the 1934 NFL Championship where the Giants, wearing sneakers defeated the Bears 30\u201313 on a cold, icy day at the Polo Grounds.\n1940s: The Monsters of the Midway.\nFrom 1940 to 1947, quarterback Sid Luckman led the Bears to victories in four out of the five NFL Championship Games in which they appeared. The team acquired the University of Chicago's discarded nickname \"Monsters of the Midway\" and their famous helmet wishbone-C, as well as a newly penned theme song that declared them \"The Pride and Joy of Illinois\". One famous victory during that period was their 73\u20130 victory over the favored Washington Redskins at Griffith Stadium in the 1940 NFL Championship Game; the score is still an NFL record for lopsided results. The secret behind the one-sided outcome was the introduction of a new offensive formation by Halas. The T-formation, as Halas named it, involved two running backs instead of the traditional one in the backfield. Luckman established himself as one of the franchise's most elite quarterbacks. Between 1939 and 1950, he set the Bears' passing records for most career touchdowns, yards, and completions. Many of Luckman's records stood for decades before they were eclipsed by Jay Cutler in .\nCutler then went on to break Luckman's franchise record for most career passing touchdowns a year later in .\n1950s\u20131968: Late-Halas era.\nAfter declining throughout the 1950s, the team rebounded in to capture its eighth NFL Championship, which would be its last until 1985. The late 1960s and early-1970s produced notable players like Dick Butkus, Gale Sayers, and Brian Piccolo, who died of embryonal carcinoma in 1970. The American television network ABC aired a movie about Piccolo in 1971 entitled \"Brian's Song\", starring James Caan and Billy Dee Williams in the roles of Piccolo and Sayers respectively; Jack Warden won an Emmy Award for his performance as Halas. The movie was later released for theater screenings after first being shown on television. Despite Hall of Fame careers, Butkus and Sayers would also have their careers cut short due to injuries, hamstringing the Bears of this era.\nHalas retired as coach in 1967 and spent the rest of his days in the front office. He became the only person to be involved with the NFL throughout the first 60 years of its existence. He was also a member of the Pro Football Hall of Fame's first induction class in 1963. As the only living founder of the NFL at the February 1970 merger between the NFL and the American Football League, the owners honored Halas by electing him the first President of the National Football Conference, a position that he held until his death in 1983. In his honor, the NFL named the NFC Championship trophy as the George Halas Memorial Trophy.\n1969\u20131982: Struggles.\nAfter the merger, the Bears finished the 1970 season last place in their division, a repeat of their placing in the 1969 season. In 1975, the Bears drafted Walter Payton from Jackson State University with their first pick. He won the NFL Most Valuable Player Award in the 1977\u201378 season. Payton would go on to eclipse Jim Brown's NFL career rushing record in 1984 before retiring in 1987, and would hold the mark until , when Emmitt Smith of the Dallas Cowboys surpassed it. Payton's career and personality would capture the hearts of Bear fans, who called him \"Sweetness\". He died from a rare form of liver cancer in 1999 at the age of 45.\nOn November 1, 1983, a day after the death of George Halas, his oldest daughter, Virginia McCaskey, took over as the majority owner of the team. Her husband, Ed McCaskey, succeeded her father as the chairman of the board. Their son Michael became the third president in team history. Virginia holds the honorary title of \"secretary of the board of directors\", but has been called the glue that holds the franchise together. Virginia's reign as the owner of the Bears was not planned, as her father originally earmarked her brother, George \"Mugs\" Halas Jr. as the heir apparent to the franchise. However, he died of a heart attack in 1979. Her impact on the team is well-noted as her own family has dubbed her \"The First Lady of Sports\", and the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" has listed her as one of Chicago's most powerful women.\n1983\u20131985: Contenders, then Super Bowl champions.\nMike Ditka, a tight end for the Bears from 1961 to 1966, was hired to coach the team by George Halas in 1982. His gritty personality earned him the nickname \"Iron Mike\". The team reached the NFC Championship game, losing to the San Francisco 49ers 23\u20130, in 1984. In the 1985 season the fire in the Bears\u2013Packers rivalry was re-lit when Ditka used 315-pound defensive tackle \"Refrigerator\" Perry as a running back in a touchdown play at Lambeau Field, against the Packers. The Bears won their ninth NFL Championship, first since the AFL-NFL merger, in Super Bowl XX after the 1985 season in which they dominated the NFL with their then-revolutionary 46 defense and a cast of characters that recorded the novelty rap song \"The Super Bowl Shuffle\". The season was notable in that the Bears had only one loss, the \"unlucky 13th\" game of the season, a Monday night affair in which they were defeated by the Miami Dolphins. At the time, much was made of the fact that the Dolphins were the only franchise in history to have had an undefeated season and post-season. The Dolphins came close to setting up a rematch in the Super Bowl, but lost to the New England Patriots in the AFC title game. \"The Super Bowl Shuffle\" was videotaped the day after that Monday night loss in Miami.\n1986\u20132003: Post-Super Bowl era.\nAfter the 1985 championship season, the Bears remained competitive throughout the 1980s but failed to return to the Super Bowl under Ditka. Throughout the remainder of his tenure, Ditka led the Bears to five more postseason berths, getting as far as the NFC Championship in the 1988 season. Between the firing of Ditka and the hiring of Lovie Smith, the Bears had two head coaches, Dave Wannstedt and Dick Jauron. While both head coaches led the team to the playoffs once (Wannstedt in 1994 and Jauron in 2001), neither was able to accumulate a winning record or bring the Bears back to the Super Bowl. Therefore, the 1990s was largely considered to be a disappointment.\nBefore the Bears hired Jauron in January 1999, Dave McGinnis (Arizona's defensive coordinator, and a former Bears assistant under Ditka and Wannstedt) backed out of taking the head coaching position. The Bears scheduled a press conference to announce the hiring before McGinnis agreed to contract terms. Soon after Jauron's hiring, Mrs. McCaskey fired her son Michael as president, replacing him with Ted Phillips and promoting Michael to chairman of the board. Phillips became the first man outside of the Halas-McCaskey family to run the team. From 1997 to 2000, the Bears suffered four consecutive last place finishes within the division.\nIn the 2001 season, Jim Miller took over as the primary starting quarterback and helped lead the Bears to a resurgent 13\u20133 record and division title. The 2001 team did not see any postseason success as they fell 33\u201319 to the Philadelphia Eagles in the Divisional Round. The 2002 season saw a setback as the team went 4\u201312. The team improved to a 7\u20139 record in 2003 but still missed the postseason. Jauron was fired following the end of the 2003 season.\n2004\u20132012: Lovie Smith era.\nLovie Smith, hired on January 15, 2004, is the third post-Ditka head coach. Joining the Bears as a rookie head coach, Smith brought the highly successful Tampa 2 defensive scheme with him to Chicago. Before his second season with the Bears, the team rehired their former offensive coordinator and then Illinois head coach Ron Turner to improve the Bears' struggling offense. In , the Bears won their division and reached the playoffs for the first time in four years. Their previous playoff berth was earned by winning the NFC Central in . The Bears improved upon their success the following season, by clinching their second consecutive NFC North title during Week 13 of the season, winning their first playoff game since 1995, and earning a trip to Super Bowl XLI. However, they fell short of the championship, losing 29\u201317 to the Indianapolis Colts. Following the 2006 season, the club decided to give Smith a contract extension through 2011, at roughly $5\u00a0million per year. This comes a season after being the lowest-paid head coach in the National Football League.\nThe club has played in over a thousand games since becoming a charter member of the NFL in . Through the 2010 season, they led the NFL in overall franchise wins with 704 and had an overall record of 704\u2013512\u201342 (going 687\u2013494\u201342 during the regular season and 17\u201318 in the playoffs). On November 18, 2010, the Bears recorded franchise win number 700 in a win against the Miami Dolphins.\nThe Bears made one of the biggest trades in franchise history, acquiring Pro Bowl quarterback Jay Cutler from the Denver Broncos in exchange for Kyle Orton and draft picks on April 2, 2009. After a disappointing 2009 campaign with the team going 7\u20139, Mike Martz was hired as the team's offensive coordinator on February 1, 2010. On March 5, 2010, the Bears signed defensive end Julius Peppers, running back Chester Taylor, and tight end Brandon Manumaleuna, spending over $100\u00a0million on the first day of free agency. Also during the 2010 offseason, Michael McCaskey was replaced by brother George McCaskey as chairman of the Bears. With a 38\u201334 win against the New York Jets, the Bears clinched the No. 2 seed and a first-round bye for the 2010\u201311 NFL playoffs. In their first Playoff game since Super Bowl XLI, The Bears defeated the No. 4 seed Seattle Seahawks 35\u201324 in the Divisional Round. The Bears reached the NFC Championship Game, where they played Green Bay Packers at Soldier Field \u2013 only the second playoff meeting between the two storied rivals, the only other game played in 1941. The Bears lost the game, 21\u201314.\nThe team started the 2011 season strong with a 7\u20133 record, and running back Matt Fort\u00e9 led the NFL in total yards from scrimmage. Eventually, quarterback Jay Cutler fractured his thumb, and Fort\u00e9 also was lost for the season against the Kansas City Chiefs after spraining his MCL, and the Bears, with Caleb Hanie playing, lost five straight before winning against the Minnesota Vikings with Josh McCown starting over Hanie. At season's end, general manager Jerry Angelo was fired, and former Chiefs director of scouting and former Bears scout Phil Emery was brought in. Offensive coordinator Mike Martz resigned, and eventually retired, and was replaced by offensive line coach Mike Tice. The Bears made another notable move by trading for Miami Dolphins receiver and Pro Bowl MVP Brandon Marshall. The Bears became the first team in NFL history to return six interceptions for touchdowns in the first seven games of the season, with another pick-six by Brian Urlacher in Week 9 bringing Chicago two behind the record set by the 1961 San Diego Chargers. However, the Bears missed the playoffs with a record of 10\u20136 (after starting the season 7\u20131, the first team to start with the record and miss the playoffs since the 1996 Washington Redskins), and Smith was fired on December 31.\n2013\u20132014: Marc Trestman years.\nThen-CFL head coach and former NFL journeyman Marc Trestman was hired to succeed Smith after an exhaustive search that included at least 13 known candidates. On March 20, 2013, Brian Urlacher's 13-year tenure with the Bears ended when both sides failed to agree on a contract. The Trestman era began on September 8 with a 24\u201321 win over the Cincinnati Bengals, making Trestman the fourth head coach in Bears history to win in his coaching debut, after George Halas (1920), Neill Armstrong (1978) and Dick Jauron (1999). The Bears ended the 2013 season 8\u20138, barely missing the playoffs after losing in the final week of the season to the Packers. Despite having a second-ranked offense that set numerous franchise records, the defense greatly worsened as it set franchise worsts in categories like yards allowed (6,313).\nThe following season was a disaster for the Bears, with the offense regressing to finish outside the top 20 in scoring. The team also allowed 50-point games in two straight weeks against the Patriots and Packers, including a franchise-high 42 points and NFL-record six touchdowns allowed in the first half against the latter, to become the first team since the 1923 Rochester Jeffersons to allow at least 50 points in consecutive games. The Bears ended the year 5\u201311 and last in the NFC North. Trestman and Emery were fired after the season ended.\n2015\u20132017: John Fox years.\nThe Bears hired Ryan Pace of the New Orleans Saints to be their new general manager on January 8, 2015. On January 16, 2015, John Fox accepted a four-year deal to become head coach. In Fox's first season as head coach, the Bears saw improvements from 2014; after \"USA Today\" projected the Bears to win three games, they doubled that total and finished the season with a 6\u201310 record, including a Thanksgiving win over the Packers at Lambeau Field.\nHowever, during the 2016 season, the Bears regressed heavily, compiling a 3\u201313 record (their worst since the NFL's change to 16-game seasons in 1978). The season included several injuries to starters and secondary players, including Jay Cutler, who only played five games as a result of two separate injuries. Backup quarterback Brian Hoyer started the next three games before a broken arm put him out for the season. He was replaced by Matt Barkley, who made his first career start with the Bears. None of the three quarterbacks returned for the 2017 season.\nIn the 2017 NFL draft, the team selected quarterback Mitchell Trubisky with the second-overall pick, who sat behind newly signed quarterback Mike Glennon for the first four games before taking over. The Bears ended the season 5\u201311 and again finished last in the NFC North. On January 1, 2018, Fox was fired, ending his tenure in Chicago with a 14\u201334 record.\n2018\u20132021: Matt Nagy years.\nThe Bears hired Matt Nagy from the Kansas City Chiefs as their new head coach in January 2018. General manager Ryan Pace signed receivers Taylor Gabriel, Allen Robinson, and Trey Burton in the offseason to complement second-year quarterback Mitchell Trubisky. The Bears also acquired linebacker Khalil Mack in a block-blockbuster trade from the Oakland Raiders to further bolster their defense, sending a package of draft picks that includes 2019 and 2020 1st round draft picks in exchange. Nagy's Bears clinched the NFC North on December 16, 2018, for the first time since 2010 with a 24\u201317 victory over the Green Bay Packers. The Bears finished the 2018 season with a 12\u20134 record. They lost to the defending Super Bowl Champions Philadelphia Eagles in the wild-card round of the playoffs after Cody Parkey's game-winning field goal attempt was partially tipped and hit the uprights in the final seconds of the game, a play coined the \"Double Doink\". Despite the first-round exit, Nagy was named Coach of the Year by the Pro Football Writers Association (PFWA) and Associated Press (AP). He was the first Bears coach to be given the AP award since Lovie Smith in 2005 and the fifth in team history.\nIn 2019, the team regressed to an 8\u20138 record, though Nagy's combined 20 wins in 2018 and 2019 were the most by a Bears head coach in his first two seasons. During the year, renovations to Halas Hall were completed, allowing the team to move Training Camp from Ward Field on the campus of Olivet Nazarene University in Bourbonnais, Illinois to Lake Forest for 2020.\nThe Bears opened the 2020 season with a 5\u20131 record. However, they lost their next six games. The Bears won three of their last four games to finish the season with an 8\u20138 record. Despite their finish, the Bears qualified for the 2020\u201321 NFL playoffs, which was expanded to include one additional wildcard team from each conference. The New Orleans Saints defeated the Bears in the opening round of the playoffs, 21\u20139. The team did not re-sign Trubisky after the 2020 season and instead allowed him to become a free agent.\nPrior to the 2021 season, the Bears traded up in the 2021 NFL draft to select quarterback Justin Fields 11th overall. The team also signed veteran quarterback Andy Dalton in free agency. Dalton was initially declared the Bears starting quarterback, but Fields won the position after Dalton was injured. The Bears finished the season with a 6\u201311 record and missed the playoffs. Nagy and general manager Ryan Pace were fired after the season's conclusion. Nagy posted a 34\u201333 record over four seasons with two playoff berths, while Pace compiled a 48\u201365 record over seven seasons.\n2022\u20132024: Matt Eberflus years.\nOn January 25, 2022, the Bears hired Ryan Poles as their general manager. The team hired Matt Eberflus as the franchise's 17th head coach two days later. The Bears struggled throughout the 2022 season, which included a franchise-record 10-game losing streak. They finished with an NFL worst 3\u201314 record, which secured the team the first overall pick in the 2023 NFL draft. The Bears traded the first overall pick to the Carolina Panthers in exchange for wide receiver D. J. Moore and multiple draft picks. The Bears opened the 2023 season with a 0\u20134 record, extending the team losing streak to 14 (longest in team history; dating back to the 2022 season). The team bounced back by winning five of their last eight games, but finished with a 7\u201310 record, placing last in the NFC North for the second consecutive season. However, the team acquired the first overall pick in the 2024 NFL draft, which was part of their previous trade with the Panthers, who finished the 2023 season with worst record in the NFL. The first overall pick was used on USC quarterback Caleb Williams. The Bears fired Eberflus on November 29, with five games remaining in the 2024 NFL season. Eberflus, who a posted a 14\u201332 overall record with the Bears, was the first head coach in team history to be fired before the end of the season.\n2025\u2013present: Ben Johnson years.\nOn January 21, 2025, the Bears hired Ben Johnson as the franchise's 18th head coach.\nOwnership.\nThe team is primarily owned by the heirs of George Halas. His daughter, Virginia Halas McCaskey (holds 22.6% of the team shares), is the principal owner and votes on behalf of her 11 children and two nephews (who each own 3.8%) as well as the Brizzolara family (who own 8.33%), which amounts to an 80.33% ownership stake, allowing her to control the team. Former chairman and CEO of Aon Corp. Pat Ryan (17.67%) and former Aon director Andrew J. McKenna's estate (2%) own the remainder 19.67% of the club. Ryan is also a board member. The McCaskey family has right of first refusal on stock sale, while Ryan's block has second refusal rights.\nIn 2020, \"Forbes\" magazine reported that the franchise is worth $3.525\u00a0billion, making it the seventh richest franchise in the NFL. Chicago is the third largest media market in the United States.\nIn a \"Crain's Chicago Business\" article, one businessman described his wishes for the team to maximize its potential. In 2009, \"Yahoo! Sports\" listed the McCaskeys as the third worst owner in the NFL, stating \"[T]hey get less for what they've got than any team in our league.\"\nOwnership history.\nThe club was founded by A. E. Staley Manufacturing Company owner Augustus Eugene Staley in 1919 and was owned by the company until 1921. In 1921, Staley felt he could no longer afford the expensive burden of pro-football and transferred team ownership to Halas and paid him $5,000 for a sponsorship deal that kept the Staleys name for one more year. Halas than added Edward \"Dutch\" Sternaman as a second owner. On January 28, 1922, the Bears were incorporated at an NFL meeting, as \"a new league team\" after its name change. At season's end, the two competed with agent Bill Harley for ownership of the Staleys, after he negotiated a contract that was to give his brother Chic Harley and himself one-third ownership of the team as part of his contract. However, Halas and Sternaman claimed that the contract was voided when a physical revealed health impairments resultant from Harley's time in the war. The other league owners agreed to nullify the deal in favor of the Halas/Sternaman partnership by an 8\u20132 vote. In addition, Halas and Sternaman offered a share of the team to Paddy Driscoll, but the move was blocked by the owners in the NFL's June meeting, after the Chicago Cardinals (Driscoll's team) activated the league's reserve clause.\nIn 1931, Sternaman offered to sell his stake to Halas for $38,000 to focus on his other businesses. Halas\u2019 purchase agreement with Sternaman was to be paid off in installments, and stipulated that if Halas defaulted on any of the payments, ownership of the team reverted to Sternaman. Halas raised the initial funding by selling an 8.33% ownership stake to Ralph Brizzolara, as well as $5,000 of shares to Jim McMillen, and George Trafton's mother, who paid $20,000 (Halas later bought her out for $40,000). Charles Bidwill purchased $5,000 in stock in 1933 (which was later bought off of his widow Violet for $50,000 in 1949) and he also arranged a bank loan for the remaining $5,000 needed to pay off Sternaman:\nHalas remained the club's president and principal owner until his death on October 31, 1983.\nHalas' children, George \"Mugs\" Halas Jr. and Virginia McCaskey acquired stock in the team through prior gifts and sales. After Mugs' death in 1979, Halas Sr. owned a 49.35% interest in the Bears, Mugs' estate owned a 19.67% interest, while Virginia McCaskey, Jim Finks (3.5%, which he later relinquished when he resigned as the team GM), Charles Brizzolara, Robert and Carol Brizzolara in joint tenancy, and Nancy Lorenz owned the remaining outstanding shares. In 1981, the shareholders merged the Bears with a newly formed Delaware-incorporated organization, the Chicago Bears Football Club, Inc..\nIn 1987, Mugs' estate executor wanted to sell his ownership stake and challenged the legality of a 1981 corporate reorganization and the other owners' right of first refusal, while his heirs, Christine and Stephen Halas, wanted to keep their father's stake, asking a Cook County Probate Court judge not to allow the sale. Ultimately they failed to block the Chicago Bears from buying their father's 19.67% ownership stake of the team, which sold for $17.5 million in 1988. Bears then-president Michael McCaskey called the purchase a \"terrific financial burden\", and the team would later sell the stake to Chicago-area businessmen Andrew McKenna and Patrick Ryan for a then-undisclosed sum in 1990. At the time it was also speculated that they invested to help the Bears lobby lawmakers for a domed stadium. In 2017, the NFL approved a sale of shares from Mugs' children (unreported whom or how much) to the McCaskey family for an undisclosed sum.\nSponsorships.\nThe team has major sponsorship deals with Dr Pepper Snapple Group, Miller Brewing Company, PNC Financial Services, United Airlines, Verizon, Xfinity, and Proven IT. The team was the first in the NFL to have a presenting sponsor, with the 2004 season advertised as \"Bears Football presented by BankOne\". Additionally, the Bears have an agreement with WFLD (the Fox owned-and-operated station in Chicago) to broadcast pre-season football games.\nLogos and uniforms.\nThe club has had few official logos throughout their history. When the team was known as the Decatur Staleys in 1920, they used A. E. Staley's logo as football was intended to help promote the company. The first Chicago Bears logo was introduced in 1940, depicting a black bear running with a football. The next logo, introduced in 1946, featured a navy blue bear on top of a football.\nIn 1962, the Bears introduced their trademark \"wishbone-C\" logo for the first time. Initially white with a black outline, the logo is similar to the \"C\" long worn on the Cincinnati Reds' baseball caps, and very closely resembles the University of Chicago Maroons' \"C\" logo introduced in 1898. The change in the Bears' logo was due to the addition of logos on helmets, which professional football teams began adding in the late 1950s and early 1960s.\nIn 2023, the Bears made their primary logo the orange bear head, which was previously their secondary logo since 1999. Despite demoting the \"C\" to a secondary logo, the team will still retain it on their helmets and at the home field's 50-yard line.\nTeam culture.\nMascots and cheerleaders.\nBefore the 2003 season, the team had two unofficial mascots named \"Rocky\" and \"Bearman\". \"Rocky\" was a man who donned a #1 Bears jersey, carried a megaphone, and started chants all over Soldier Field during the 1970s, 1980s, and early 1990s, in a fashion similar to Fireman Ed. The identity of \"Rocky\" is unknown, but he presumably lives in northwestern Indiana. Don Wachter, also known as \"Bearman\", is a season ticket holder who decided in 1995 that he could also assist the team by cheerleading, similar to Rocky. The club allowed him to run across the field with a large Bears flag during player introductions and each team score (a role more recently done by the Bears 4th Phase and Bears captains). In 1996, he donned his \"costume\" of face paint, bear head and arms, and a number 46 jersey. \"Bearman\" was forced to stop wearing his costume with the introduction of Staley Da Bear in 2003, but in 2005 Wachter was allowed in costume again.\nStaley Da Bear is an anthropomorphic bear with a customized No. 00 jersey, with blue and orange eyes, synonymous with the team's main colors. His name is eponymous to starch processing company A. E. Staley, who founded the Bears' franchise. Like Rocky and Bearman, he entertains Bears fans, but like other NFL mascots, and mascots in general, Staley also visits charity events, parties, Chicago Rush AFL games, and other Bears-related events, as well as taking part in games with his \"furballs\" against youth football teams at halftime.\nThe team had a cheerleading squad called the Chicago Honey Bears beginning in 1976. However, Bears owner Virginia Halas McCaskey terminated them after the 1985 season. The squad's uniforms changed three times: from 1976 to 1979, the uniform was a white bodysuit with navy blue sleeves; from 1980 to 1984 it was a white bodysuit with orange sleeves and the navy was moved to the trim, and for the squad's final season in 1985, the uniform was redesigned with an orange sequin vest.\nPhilanthropy.\nSince 1998, the Bears have partnered with 'A Safe Place,' a domestic violence shelter in Waukegan, Illinois. In June 2017, existing and former Bears employees helped renovate the shelter by ripping up carpet, painting walls, demolishing a kitchen and building a fence. The Bears have also provided financial support throughout the years.\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nGreen Bay Packers.\nThe Green Bay Packers are the Bears' biggest rivals since their team's inception in 1920. The Green Bay Packers currently have the lead at 103\u201395\u20136, and the teams have met twice in the postseason. The Bears won the 1941 meeting, 33\u201314, and eventually defeated the New York Giants in the 1941 NFL Championship Game, and the Packers won the 2011 meeting, 21\u201314, en route to a Super Bowl XLV win over the Pittsburgh Steelers. The teams' first meeting was a victory for the Bears (known as the Staleys at the time) in 1921 in a shutout, 20\u20130. The Packers claimed their first win over the Bears in 1925, 14\u201310. The 1924 matchup (which ended in a 3\u20130 win for Chicago) was notable for featuring the first-ever ejection of players in a game in NFL history, as Frank Hanny of the Bears and Walter Voss of the Packers were ejected for punching each other. The rivalry also featured one of the last successful fair catch kicks in 1968, when Bears kicker Mac Percival kicked the game-winning field goal.\nDetroit Lions.\nThe Detroit Lions and Bears have faced off since the Lions' inception in 1930, when they were known as the Portsmouth Spartans, with the Spartans winning, 7\u20136, and Chicago winning the second meeting, 14\u20136. Since then, the Bears have led the series, 99\u201374\u20135. The rivalry grew in 1932, when the Bears and Spartans met in the first-ever postseason game in NFL history, with the Bears winning the game 9\u20130. The game also was known as the first pro \"indoor football\" game, as the game took place in indoor Chicago Stadium due to a blizzard at the time. The game also started the forward pass.\nMinnesota Vikings.\nChicago and Minnesota took each other on in the Vikings' inaugural game, with the Vikings defeating the Bears in a 37\u201313 rout, and Minnesota currently holds the series lead 60\u201354\u20132.\nHistoric.\nChicago/St. Louis/Arizona Cardinals.\nThe oldest continuing matchup in the NFL belongs to the Bears and the Arizona Cardinals. It began as intense intra-city rivalry between the Bears and the Chicago Cardinals, which the Bears were leading 47\u201319\u20136 through 1959, when the Cardinals moved to St. Louis. The rivalry's importance waned further after the Cardinals moved to the Phoenix metropolitan area in 1988. The Bears lead the all-time series 59\u201328\u20136. The teams have yet to meet in the playoffs.\nNew York Giants.\nThe Bears and the New York Giants squared off in six NFL championship games, more than any common match-up in either the NFL championship game or Super Bowl. The Bears won four of the six championship games, which included the Sneakers Game that the Giants won in the 1934 NFL Championship Game. The two teams also met in the 1985 and 1990 playoffs, splitting each meeting en route to a Super Bowl championship (Bears in Super Bowl XX, Giants in Super Bowl XXV). As of the 2023 season, the Bears lead the all-time series 36\u201325\u20132.\nSan Francisco 49ers.\nThe Bears and San Francisco 49ers were regular foes while both played in the Western Conference. The rivalry grew during the 1980s, as both teams were constant playoff contenders in the NFC. The 49ers currently hold the series lead 35\u201333\u20131 and 3\u20130 in the playoffs. Under the current NFL scheduling formula, the Bears and 49ers play at least once every four years.\nTampa Bay Buccaneers.\nThe Bears holds historic rivalry with its former NFC Central foe Tampa Bay Buccaneers. as of the 2023 season, Chicago currently holds the series lead 40\u201322. Under the current NFL scheduling formula, the Bears and Bucs play at least once every four years.\nWashington Commanders.\nAlthough the teams never played in the same division, the Bears and the Washington Commanders have a historically significant rivalry, dating back to 1932, when the Commanders were located in Boston and were known as the Braves. The rivalry started to heat up in 1937, when Washington drafted quarterback Sammy Baugh and both teams were often met in the NFL Championship Game. The most memorable game from that era was in 1940, when the Bears set a record by defeating the Commanders 73-0 in the NFL Championship game, to this day, the largest margin of victory in league history. The series regained steam in the 1980s, when both teams were fighting for the NFC supremacy. Washington holds a slight edge in the all-time series 27-25-1 (2\u20131 in the playoffs and 2\u20132 in championship games). Under the current NFL scheduling formula, the Bears and Commanders play at least once every four years.\nMinor.\nCleveland/Los Angeles/St. Louis Rams.\nThe Cleveland/Los Angeles/St. Louis Rams and the Bears played in the same division the 1937 NFL season to the 1969 NFL season (with the 1958 game attracting 100,470 fans, the largest in Bears history), while the two franchises continue to play annually until the 1980 NFL season. From 1995 to 2015 the two teams were part of the Chicago-St. Louis rivalries in the major professional leagues. As of the 2023 season, Chicago currently holds the series lead 54\u201339\u20133 (1\u20131 in the playoffs). It is the Rams' longest-running, non-division series. Under the current NFL scheduling formula, the Bears and Rams play at least once every four years.\nMiami Dolphins.\nThe AFC member Miami Dolphins and the Bears met less than 15 times but most of them were memorable. The most notable was the 1985 shootout at Monday Night, as Miami handing Chicago their first, and only, regular-season loss for the year, while keeping the 1972 Dolphins as the only perfect team in NFL history. As of the 2023 season, Miami currently holds the series lead 10\u20134. Under the current NFL scheduling formula, the teams play at least once every four years.\nDefunct.\nRock Island Independents.\nChicago had a fierce instate rivalry with the Rock Island Independents in the league's first decade, with the Bears winning the series 8\u20131\u20134.\nCanton/Cleveland Bulldogs.\nThe Canton/Cleveland Bulldogs and the Staleys/Bears rivalry was between the two NFL's powerhouses in the 1920s, with games usually attracting the most fans, and the outcome often decided the fate of NFL Championship (1921\u20131924). The rivalry grow after the 1921 season, when the Staleys star Guy Chamberlin joined the Bulldogs and led them to three consecutive championships, including a tiebreaker win over the Bears in 1924. Chicago won the series 4\u20133.\nFacilities.\nStadium.\nSoldier Field, located on Lake Shore Drive in Chicago, is the home of the Bears. The Bears moved to Soldier Field in 1971 after outgrowing Wrigley Field, the team's home for 50 years. After the AFL-NFL Merger, the league preferred their teams to play in stadiums that could hold at least 50,000 fans. Even with portable bleachers that the team set up at Wrigley, the stadium could still only hold 46,000. At first, the Bears were supposed to play at Dyche Stadium (later called Ryan Field), but Northwestern University's residential neighbors objected, and the agreement was cancelled. The original home of the Bears was Staley Field at Decatur, Illinois, when the team was known as the Decatur Staleys, before they moved to Chicago in 1921.\nSoldier Field's playing surface was changed from natural grass to astroturf before the 1971 season, and then back to natural grass in time for the start of the 1988 season. Throughout its history, Soldier Field's field maintenance has been done by the Chicago Park District (the municipal entity from which the Bears lease the field) by disparate district employees, rather than a permanent team-employed grounds crew, generating some controversy among players for its rough surface. This arrangement caused disagreements with the city throughout the years, with the Bears attempting to agree on a new stadium since 1986. The stadium was the site of the infamous Fog Bowl playoff game between the Bears and Philadelphia Eagles.\nIn 2002, the stadium was closed and rebuilt with only the exterior wall being preserved. It was closed on Sunday, January 20, 2002, the day after the Bears lost in the playoffs. It reopened on September 27, 2003, after a complete rebuild (the second in the stadium's history). Many fans refer to the rebuilt stadium as \"New Soldier Field\". During the season, the Bears played their home games at the University of Illinois' Memorial Stadium in Champaign, where they went 3\u20135.\nMultiple critics have negative views of the new stadium, believing that its structure has made it more of an eyesore than a landmark; some have dubbed it the \"Mistake on the Lake\". Soldier Field was stripped of its National Historic Landmark designation on February 17, 2006.\nIn the 2005 season, the Bears won the NFC North Division and the No. 2 Seed in the NFC Playoffs, entitling them to play at least one home game in the postseason. The team hosted (and lost) their divisional round match on January 15, 2006, against the Carolina Panthers. This was the first playoff game at Soldier Field since the stadium reopened.\nThe stadium's end zones and midfield were unpainted until the 1982 season. The design sported on the field included the bolded word \"Chicago\" rendered in Highway Gothic in both end zones. In 1983, the end zone design returned, with the addition of a large wishbone \"C\" Bears logo painted at midfield. These field markings remained unchanged until the 1996 season. In 1996 the midfield wishbone \"C\" was changed to a large blue Bears head, and the end zone design were painted with \"Bears\" in cursive. This design remained until the 1999 season, when the artwork was returned to the classic \"Chicago\" and \"C\". In the new Soldier Field, the artwork was tweaked with the word \"Chicago\" bolded in one end zone and the other having \"Bears\".\nIn June 2021, the Bears submitted a bid to purchase the Arlington International Racecourse in Arlington Heights, Illinois from Churchill Downs. Despite negotiations between the city of Chicago to upgrade Soldier Field again, the Bears entered into an agreement with Churchill Downs to purchase the Arlington International Racecourse in September 2021 for $197.2 million. The sale of the property which includes 326 acres of space for potential development closed on February 15, 2023. As of 2024, the Bears have shifted their focus to the parking area south of Soldier Field on Museum Campus. On April 24, 2024, the Bears revealed plans for a $4.7 billion domed lakefront stadium development.\nTraining camp locations.\nFrom its inception until 1930 the Staleys/Bears conducted their summer training camp in their home stadiums: Staley Field (Decatur, Illinois) and later Cubs' Park (Chicago). In 1930 they first moved to Mills Stadium in Chicago and from 1931 to 1934 to Loyola University Chicago, Logan Square Baseball Park, Notre Dame University and Lane Tech College Prep High School, respectively. In 1935 they began to conduct training camps at a prominent location, when they started practicing at St. John's Northwestern Military Academy (Delafield, Wisconsin) for a decade.\nIn 1944 they moved to St. Joseph's College in Rensselaer, Indiana and stayed there for 30 years. This location was the place of the famous automobile accident on July 27, 1964 that killed Bears players Willie Galimore and Bo Farrington, after Galimore's Volkswagen left the road on a curve and rolled, a few miles from the team's training camp.\nFrom 1975 to 1984 they conducted their summer training camp in Lake Forest College, at the original Halas Hall (the practice and front office facility for the Bears from 1977 until 1997). The practice field was later renamed Farwell Field and serves as the main field for Foresters football and soccer.\nFrom 1984 to 2001, the Bears held pre-season training camp in Ralph E. Davis Pioneer Stadium at University of Wisconsin\u2013Platteville. They were considered a member of the \"Cheese League\" that in 1999 consisted of the Green Bay Packers, New Orleans Saints and Kansas City Chiefs, with each team practicing at a different university in Wisconsin. In 2001, the Illinois General Assembly asked the Bears to move to an Illinois practice facility in order to raise funds for remodeling Soldier Field. Before the Bears left, they donated $250,000 to UW\u2013Platteville for a new computer lab, which was named \"The Bears Den\". On June 16, 2014, the stadium was damaged by a tornado and the Bears donated $50,000 to the school relief fund.\nFrom 2002 to 2019, the Bears held their summer training camp at Olivet Nazarene University in Bourbonnais. Although the Bears had an agreement to continue practicing there through 2022, they moved the camp permanently into the recently renovated Halas Hall in 2020.\nHeadquarters.\nThe team headquarters, Halas Hall, named after founder George Halas, is in the Chicago suburb of Lake Forest, Illinois. The Bears practice at adjoining facilities during the season. The location is west of the original Halas Hall which had opened in 1977, and it was named after George Halas Jr., who died unexpectedly in 1979. It was located at Lake Forest College and contained 2 practice fields (one regulation-size outdoor field as well as a 70-yard practice field) and front office facilities, which is used by the Foresters Athletics Department. The 38-acre complex opened on March 3, 1997, and was expanded in 2013 and 2018.\nThe team also has a corporate office in downtown Chicago, located at 123 N. Wacker Dr, for sales, corporate partnerships and events departments employees.\nIn popular culture.\nWhile the Super Bowl XX champion Bears were a fixture of mainstream American pop culture in the 1980s, the Bears made a prior mark with the 1971 American TV movie \"Brian's Song\" starring Billy Dee Williams as Gale Sayers and James Caan as Brian Piccolo. The film told of how Piccolo helped Sayers recover from a devastating knee injury to return to his status as one of the league's best players, and how Sayers in turn helped the Piccolo family through Brian's fatal illness. A 2001 remake of the movie for ABC starred Sean Maher as Piccolo and Mekhi Phifer as Sayers.\nThe 1985 team is also remembered for recording the song \"The Super Bowl Shuffle\", which reached number forty-one on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and was nominated for a Grammy Award. The music video for the song depicts the team rapping that they are \"not here to start no trouble\" but instead \"just here to do the Super Bowl Shuffle\". The team took a risk by recording and releasing the song before the playoffs had even begun, but were able to avoid embarrassment by going on to win Super Bowl XX by a then-record margin of 46\u201310. That game was one of the most-watched television events in history according to the Nielsen ratings system; the game had a rating of 48.3, ranking it seventh in all-time television history.\nIn addition to the \"Super Bowl Shuffle\" rap song, the Bears' success in the 1980s \u2013 and especially the personality of head coach Mike Ditka \u2013 inspired a recurring sketch on the American sketch comedy program \"Saturday Night Live\", called \"Bill Swerski's Superfans\". The sketch featured \"Cheers\" co-star George Wendt, a Chicago native, as host of a radio talk-show (similar in tone to WGN radio's \"The Sportswriters\"), with co-panelists Carl Wollarski (Robert Smigel), Pat Arnold (Mike Myers) and Todd O'Connor (Chris Farley). To hear them tell it, \"Da Bears\" and Coach Ditka could do no wrong. The sketch stopped after Ditka was fired in 1993. The sketch usually showed the panelists chugging beer and eating lots of Polish sausage, and often featured Todd getting so agitated about what was happening with the Bears that he suffered a heart attack, but quickly recovered (through self-administered CPR). The sketch also features the cast predicting unrealistic blowout victories for Bears games. Da Super Fan sketch has not been brought back by \"SNL\", with the exception of a single appearance by Horatio Sanz as a Super Fan for the Cubs on \"Weekend Update\" in 2003. Outside of \"SNL\", George Wendt reprised his role of Swerski in the opening promo of Super Bowl XL on ABC.\nOn TV shows based in Chicago such as \"The Bob Newhart Show\", \"Married... with Children\", \"Family Matters\", \"Still Standing\", \"According to Jim\", \"Early Edition\" and \"The Bernie Mac Show\", the main characters are all Bears fans, and have worn Bears' jerseys and T-shirts on some occasions. Some episodes even show them watching Bears games. \"Roseanne\" is another TV show based in Illinois (albeit not in Chicago itself) to feature the Bears as the consensus household favorite, as 'Dan Connor' John Goodman is seen wearing Bears hats in several episodes. \"That '70s Show\" featured several Bears references, as it was based in Wisconsin, home of the Packers. On one episode while the gang is at a Bears vs. Packers game, Eric comes to the seat in a Walter Payton jersey and is booed by the surrounding Packers fans. In an episode of the Disney Channel show \"Shake It Up\", based in Chicago, recurring character Dina Garcia (Ainsley Bailey) sold scalped Chicago Bears tickets. More recently, \"Modern Family\" character Cameron Tucker has been shown as a Bears fan. In an episode of the Disney Channel show \"I Didn't Do It\", based in Chicago, Lindy Watson (Olivia Holt) and Logan Watson (Austin North) try to get a football signed by NFL Hall of Famer Dick Butkus after destroying their fathers Butkus signed ball, Alshon Jeffery also makes a cameo appearance as well.\nDitka's success and popularity in Chicago has led him to land analyst roles on various American football pregame shows. Ditka worked for both the \"NFL on NBC\" and CBS's \"The NFL Today\", and he currently works on ESPN's \"Sunday NFL Countdown\" and provided Friday night analysis on the Bears on WBBM-TV's \"2 on Football\" with former WBBM-TV sports director Mark Malone. He is also the color analyst for all local broadcasts of Bears preseason games. Ditka also co-starred himself alongside actor Will Ferrell in the 2005 comedy film \"Kicking &amp; Screaming\".\nAlso, Ditka, Dick Butkus, Walter Payton, Jim McMahon, William \"Refrigerator\" Perry and Brian Urlacher are among Bears figures known for their appearances in TV commercials. Urlacher, whose jersey was among the league's best-selling in 2002, was featured on Nike commercials with former Atlanta Falcons quarterback Michael Vick.\nIn the 1961 Hanna-Barbera animated short \"Rah Rah Bear\", Yogi Bear helps the Bears beat the New York Giants.\nThe Bears were later depicted in an episode of the 1985 cartoon version of the NBC sitcom \"Punky Brewster\", where the Bears are playing the Green Bay Packers.\nClark Griswold (Chevy Chase) from the \"National Lampoon's Vacation series\" appears in some scenes wearing a navy blue with burnt orange scripting Chicago Bears ball cap. He wears the same Chicago Bears cap throughout all four \"Vacation\" movies.\nBroadcast media.\nRadio.\nCurrently, WMVP (1000 AM) broadcast Bears games with Jeff Joniak doing the play-by-play, along with color commentator Tom Thayer, who played for the Bears from 1985 to 1992. Over the years, many Bears play-by-play broadcasters have included play-by-play announcers Jack Brickhouse, Joe McConnell and Wayne Larrivee, and color commentators Hub Arkush, Dick Butkus, Jim Hart and Irv Kupcinet.\nSpanish radio station WLEY-FM aired the Bears games from 2012 to 2014. Since 2015, WRTO and WVIV-FM air Bears games in Spanish.\nTelevision.\nPreseason games air on WFLD (channel 32). The announcers are Adam Amin (play-by-play), Jim Miller (color commentary) and Lou Canellis (sideline reporter). WFLD also carries the majority of the team's regular season games through the \"NFL on Fox\". Any Bears home games against AFC teams are aired on the CBS O&amp;O station, WBBM-TV, which was the Bears' unofficial \"home\" station from 1956 until Fox won the NFC rights in 1995. Sunday Night games are broadcast on WMAQ-TV, the NBC O&amp;O station, with \"ESPN Monday Night Football\" games airing either on ESPN or WLS-TV, the ABC affiliate.\nStatistics and records.\nPatrick Mannelly holds the record for the most seasons in a Bears uniform with 16. On the other hand, Steve McMichael holds the record for most consecutive games played by a Bear with 191; he accomplished the feat from 1981 to 1993. In second place is Payton, who played 186 games from 1975 to 1987 at running back, a position considered to be conducive to injury, only missing one game in a span of 13 seasons.\nKicker Robbie Gould became the Bears' all-time scoring leader in Week 5 of 2015 season overtaking placekicker Kevin Butler who previously held the club record for scoring the most points in his ten-year Bear career. He scored 1,116 points as the Bears kicker from 1985 to 1995. He is followed by running back Walter Payton, with 750 points. Payton holds the team record for career rushing yards with 16,726. That was an NFL record until Emmitt Smith of the Dallas Cowboys broke it in . Former Bears running back Matt Forte, who started playing for the Bears in 2008, is the closest to Payton's record with 6,985 yards. Forte also holds the team's single season record for rookies in rushing attempts, rushing yards and receptions. Mark Bortz holds the record for most Bear playoff appearances, with 13 between 1983 and 1994, and is followed by Kevin Butler, Dennis Gentry, Dan Hampton, Jay Hilgenberg, Steve McMichael, Ron Rivera, Mike Singletary, and Keith Van Horne, who have each played in 12 playoff games.\nThe 1940 Chicago Bears team holds the record for the biggest margin of victory in an NFL game, including both playoff and regular season games, with a 73\u20130 victory over the Washington Redskins in the 1940 NFL Championship Game. The largest home victory for the Bears came in a 61\u20137 result against the Green Bay Packers in 1980. The largest defeat in club history was a 52\u20130 loss against the Baltimore Colts in 1964. The club recorded undefeated regular seasons in 1934 and 1942; unlike the 1972 Miami Dolphins, however, they did not win the championship game in either season. In 1934, the club completed a 13\u20130 record but were defeated by the New York Giants, and in 1942 the club completed an 11\u20130 record but were defeated by the Redskins. Had the Bears won either championship, the club would have completed a championship three-peat \u2013 a feat completed only by the Packers (twice), although no team has done it since the AFL-NFL merger. Halas holds the team record for coaching the most seasons with 40 and for having the most career victories of 324. Halas' victories record stood until Don Shula surpassed Halas in . Ditka is the closest Bears coach to Halas, with 112 career victories. No other Bears coach has recorded over 100 victories with the team.\nDuring the 2006 season, return specialist Devin Hester set several kick return records. He currently holds the franchise record for most return yards with 2,261. He had six touchdown returns, setting a record for most returns in a single season. In 2007, he recorded another six touchdown season from returns. One of the most notable of these returns came on November 12, 2006, when he returned a missed field goal for a 108-yard touchdown. The record tied former teammate Nathan Vasher's previous record, which was set almost a year earlier. Hester set a Super Bowl record as the first player to return an opening kick of a Super Bowl for a touchdown. On December 20, 2010, Hester set an NFL record for most touchdowns on a punt or kickoff return with his 14th career return coming against the Minnesota Vikings. In 2011, Hester broke the record for the most punt returns against the Carolina Panthers.\nIn 2012, Charles Tillman set the record for most forced fumbles in a single game with four against the Tennessee Titans. Against the Titans, Chicago became the first team in league history to score a touchdown pass, a touchdown run, an interception return for a touchdown, and a blocked kick/punt for a score in the same quarter. Tillman and teammate Lance Briggs became the first pair in NFL history to return an interception for a touchdown in consecutive games against the Jacksonville Jaguars and Dallas Cowboys.\nSeason-by-season results.\nThis is a partial list of the Bears' last five completed seasons. For the full season-by-season franchise results, see List of Chicago Bears seasons.\n\"Note: The Finish, Wins, Losses, and Ties columns list regular season results and exclude any postseason play.\"\nPlayers of note.\nPro Football Hall of Famers.\nIn the Pro Football Hall of Fame, the Bears have the most enshrined primary members with 32; the club also has had eight Hall of Famers spend a minor portion of their career with the franchise. Founder, owner, head coach, and player George Halas, halfback Bronko Nagurski, and Red Grange were a part of the original class of inductees in 1963. The franchise saw 14 individuals inducted into the Hall of Fame from 1963 to 1967. Offensive tackle Jim Covert and defensive end Ed Sprinkle are the most recent Chicago Bear inductees, both being inducted as seniors as part of the Pro Football Hall of Fame's centennial class of 2020. In 2023 Chuck Howley, who only played minor portion of his career with the Bears, was elected as a Seniors candidate.\nIn addition, Ray Bray was enshrined in Helms Athletic Foundation Pro Football Hall of Fame, which was established in 1950 and preceded the Pro Football Hall of Fame. He's the only Bears member from the Helms Athletic Foundation hall to not be enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nChicagoland Sports Hall of Fame.\nThe Chicagoland Sports Hall of Fame was founded in 1979 and honors sports greats associated with the Chicago metropolitan area. As of 2023, there are 59 honorees enshrined in the hall with connection to the Bears.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Bears have retired 14 uniform numbers, which is the most in the NFL, and ranks fourth behind the basketball Boston Celtics (23), baseball New York Yankees (21), and hockey Montreal Canadiens (15) for the most in major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada. The Bears retired Mike Ditka's number 89 jersey on December 9, 2013. It is the last number that the Bears retired.\nTop 100 greatest Bears of all-time.\nIn honor of the team's centennial anniversary, on May 20, 2019, the Chicago Bears unveiled the Top 100 players in franchise history, as voted on by Hall of Fame writers Don Pierson and Dan Pompei, two of the most famous journalists that have ever covered the club in their long history. At the time of the publish, the list included 27 Pro Football Hall of Famers, while two more inductees would join in the 2020 Centennial class (Jim Covert and Ed Sprinkle).\nAmong the 100 Greatest, four active players made the list, including safety Eddie Jackson (96), defensive lineman Akiem Hicks (75), offensive lineman Kyle Long (74) and Khalil Mack (60), who had only played only one season with the team at the time of the unveiling of the list. Long would retire the following year.\nOn a later date, Chicagobears.com released a list titled \"Top 10: Best of the rest\" that featured the \"top 10 snubs\" from the centennial list. The players include (in a following order): Alex Brown, Thomas Jones, Dave Whitsell, Curtis Conway, Tim Jennings, Leslie Frazier, Roberto Garza, Marty Booker, Nathan Vasher and William Perry. Pompei would later say that the last two players who didn't make the list were Brown and Frazier.\n Pro Football Hall of Fame inductee.\n Pro Football Hall of Fame finalist.\n Helms Athletic Foundation Pro Football Hall of Fame inductee.\n PFRA Hall of Very Good inductee.\nAll-Time Team.\nDuring the week of June 3, 2019, the All-Time Team was announced in parts each day starting with the All-Time defensive players, followed by the All-Time specialists and then the All-Time offensive players. Bold indicates those elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nLarry Mayer of the Chicagobears.com would later state, that according to the voters \"if they had included a long-snapper on the team it would have been Patrick Mannelly\".\nMinor league affiliates.\nThe NFL, contrary to the four other major sports leagues in North America, don't have a formal farm system (beside the short lived Association of Professional Football Leagues), and over the years some teams had \"independent\" minor affiliates throughout their existence. The Bears, along with the New York Giants, were at the forefront of those endeavors when in 1939 Halas purchased the American Association's Newark Tornadoes and renamed them the \"Bears\". Halas stocked the team with talent that did not make the Chicago roster, and used the club to incubate talent and for easy return for injured players, thus making it pro football's first true farm team. Newark's most notable names included Joe Zeller as coach and Gene Ronzani (that year Chicago also assigned Sid Luckman to Newark playoff game, which the Bears won 13\u20136, to win the Southern Division title). This practice continued sporadically until 1972, and ended with the collapse of several minor leagues along with the NFL labor disputes in the 1970s.\nOther notable players assigned includes: George Gulyanics, Ed Ecker, Lloyd Reese, Raymond Schumacher, Jack Karwales and Doug McEnulty."}
{"id": "6612", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6612", "title": "Cincinnati Bengals", "text": "The Cincinnati Bengals are a professional American football team based in Cincinnati. The Bengals compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) North division. The team plays its home games at Paycor Stadium in downtown Cincinnati.\nFormer Cleveland Browns head coach Paul Brown began planning for the creation of the Bengals franchise in 1965, and Cincinnati's city council approved the construction of Riverfront Stadium in 1966. Finally, in 1967, the Bengals were founded when a group headed by Brown received franchise approval by the American Football League (AFL) on May 23, 1967, and they began play in the 1968 season. Brown was the Bengals' head coach from their inception to . \nAfter being dismissed as the Browns' head coach by Art Modell (who had purchased a majority interest in the team in ) in January , Brown had shown interest in establishing another NFL franchise in Ohio and looked at both Cincinnati and Columbus. He ultimately chose the former when a deal between the city, Hamilton County, and Major League Baseball's Cincinnati Reds (who were seeking a replacement for the obsolete Crosley Field) was struck that resulted in an agreement to build a multipurpose stadium which could host both baseball and football games. Due to the impending merger of the AFL and the NFL, which was scheduled to take full effect in the season, Brown agreed to join the AFL as its 10th and final franchise. The Bengals, like the other former AFL teams, were assigned to the AFC following the merger. Cincinnati was also selected because, like their neighbors the Reds, they could draw from several large neighboring cities (Louisville and Lexington, Kentucky; Columbus, Dayton, and Springfield, Ohio) that are all no more than away from downtown Cincinnati, along with Indianapolis, until the Baltimore Colts relocated there prior to the 1984 NFL season. \nAfter Paul Brown's death in 1991, controlling interest in the team was inherited by his son, Mike Brown. In 2011, Brown purchased shares of the team owned by the estate of co-founder Austin Knowlton and is now the majority owner of the Bengals franchise.\nThe Bengals won the AFC championship in , , and in . After each of the 1981 and 1988 conference championships, they went on to lose to the San Francisco 49ers, in Super Bowls XVI and XXIII. The team struggled greatly in the 1990s and the early 2000s, during which time they were sometimes referred to disparagingly as \"The Bungles,\" a term coined by Steelers broadcaster Myron Cope. Following the 1990 season, the team went 14 years without making the NFL playoffs or posting a winning record. The Bengals went through several head coaches in that period, and many of their top draft picks did not pan out. \nThe team's fortunes improved in the mid-2000s and into the mid-2010s, which saw them become more consistent postseason contenders, but they continued to struggle in the playoffs. The turning point for the Bengals was during the 2021 season, when they won their first playoff game in 31 years and advanced to the first of two consecutive AFC Championship games. In 2021, they defeated the Kansas City Chiefs 27\u201324 in overtime and advanced to Super Bowl LVI, their first appearance in the Super Bowl in 33 years, where they lost to the Los Angeles Rams 23\u201320. They advanced to the AFC Championship game again in 2022 but lost to the eventual Super Bowl champions, the Chiefs, by a score of 23\u201320 (the same exact score as in Super Bowl LVI).\nThe team does not have an official general manager. However, Duke Tobin is the Bengals\u2019 \u201cde facto general manager\u201d because he handles most personnel decisions. In a 2011 survey, Brown was rated as among the worst team owners in American professional sports. \nIn a \"Forbes\" article on the value of NFL teams as of August 2022, the Cincinnati Bengals were ranked last with a value of $3 billion.\nHistory.\nBrown family era (1968\u2013present).\nIn 1967, an ownership group led by Paul Brown was granted a franchise in the American Football League. Brown named the team the Bengals in order \"to give it a link with past professional football in Cincinnati\". Another Cincinnati Bengals team had existed in the city and played in three previous American Football Leagues from 1937 to 1942. The city's world-renowned zoo was also home to a rare white Bengal tiger.\nIn a possible insult to Art Modell \u2013 or possibly as a homage to the Massillon Tigers \u2013 Brown chose the exact shade of orange used by his former team. He added black as the secondary color. Brown chose a very simple logo: the word \"BENGALS\" in black lettering. One of the potential helmet designs Brown rejected was a striped motif that was similar to the helmets adopted by the team in 1981 still in use today; however, that design featured stripes which were more uniform in width. The Bengals began play in the 1968 season.\nIn 1966, the American Football League agreed to a merger with its older and more established rival, the National Football League. Among the terms of the merger was that the AFL was permitted to add one additional franchise; the NFL wanted an even number of clubs in the merged league, so a team needed to be added to bring the number of clubs in the merged league to 26 teams.\nFor the AFL, a key motive behind their agreement to accept a new team was that the guarantee of an eventual place in the NFL meant the league could charge a steep expansion fee of $10 million \u2013 400 times the $25,000 the original eight owners paid when they founded the league in 1960. The cash from the new team provided the American Football League with the funds needed to pay the indemnities required to be paid by the AFL to the NFL, as stipulated by the merger agreement.\nPrior to the merger's announcement, Brown had not seriously considered joining the American Football League and was not a supporter of what he openly regarded to be an inferior competition, once famously stating that \"I didn't pay ten million dollars to be in the AFL.\" However, with the announcement of the merger, Brown realized that the AFL expansion franchise would likely be his only realistic path back into the NFL in the short to medium term, and ultimately acquiesced to joining the AFL after learning that the team was guaranteed to become an NFL franchise after the merger was completed in 1970.\nThere was also a major problem: Major League Baseball's Cincinnati Reds were in need of a facility to replace Crosley Field, which they had used since 1912. By this time, the small park was antiquated and rundown, and parking issues had plagued the city since the early 1950s, while the park also lacked modern amenities \u2013 issues that were exacerbated by the Mill Creek Expressway (I-75) project that ran alongside the park.\nWhile New York City \u2013 which had lost both its National League teams in 1957 after the Dodgers relocated to Los Angeles, and the Giants relocated to San Francisco \u2013 had actively courted Reds owner Powel Crosley to relocate his team there, Crosley was adamant that the Reds remain in Cincinnati and tolerated the worsening problems with the Crosley Field location.\nWith assistance from Ohio governor Jim Rhodes, Hamilton County and the Cincinnati city council agreed to build a single multi-purpose facility on the dilapidated riverfront section of the city: the new facility had to be ready by the opening of the 1970 NFL season, and was officially named Riverfront Stadium.\nWith the completion of the merger in 1970, the Cleveland Browns were one of three NFL teams that agreed to move to the AFL-based American Football Conference to give both conferences an equal number of teams and were placed in the AFC Central, the same division as the Bengals. An instant rivalry was born, fueled initially by Paul Brown's rivalry with Art Modell.\nPaul Brown and Bill Johnson years (1968\u20131978).\nFor their first two seasons, the Bengals played at Nippert Stadium, the current home of the University of Cincinnati Bearcats. The team held training camp at Wilmington College in Wilmington, through the 1968 preseason. The team finished its first season with a 3\u201311 record and running back Paul Robinson, who rushed for 1,023 yards, and was named the AFL Rookie of the Year.\nFounder Paul Brown coached the team for its first eight seasons. One of Brown's college draft strategies was to draft players from non-traditional football schools. Punter/wide receiver Pat McInally attended Harvard University, and linebacker Reggie Williams attended Dartmouth College and served on Cincinnati city council while on the Bengals' roster. Because of this policy, many former players went on to have successful careers in commentary and broadcasting as well as the arts. In addition, Brown had a knack for locating and recognizing pro football talent in unusual places.\nIn 1970, the Bengals moved to play at Riverfront Stadium, a home they shared with the Cincinnati Reds until the team moved to Paul Brown Stadium in 2000. Notable players of the 1970 team included Virgil Carter, Chip Meyers, Jack Meckstroth, Bob Trumpy, and Lemar Parrish. Virgil Carter threw for 1,647 yards. Chip Myers paced all receivers, catching 32 passes for 542 yards. Bob Trumpy contributed to the receiving game, too. The team reached the playoffs three times during that decade, but could not win any of those postseason games. In 1975, the team posted an 11\u20133 record, giving them what remains the highest winning percentage (.786) in franchise history. But it only earned them a wild card spot in the playoffs, behind the 12\u20132 Pittsburgh Steelers, who went on to win the Super Bowl; the Bengals lost to the Oakland Raiders 31\u201328 in the divisional playoffs.\nForrest Gregg/Sam Wyche years (1980\u20131991).\nThe Bengals reached the Super Bowl twice during the 1980s \u2013 in Super Bowl XVI and Super Bowl XXIII \u2013 and lost against the San Francisco 49ers both times. The team appeared in the playoffs in 1990, making it to the second round before losing to the Los Angeles Raiders.\nBefore the following season got underway, Paul Brown died at age 82. Due to declining health, he had already transferred control to his son, Mike Brown, but was reported to still influence the daily operations of the team. The Bengals' fortunes changed for the worse as the team posted 14 consecutive non-winning seasons and were saddled with numerous draft busts.\nMarvin Lewis years (2003\u20132018).\nThe Bengals began to emerge from that dismal period into a new era of increased consistency, however, after the team finished with its worst record in team history, 2\u201314, which led to the hiring of Marvin Lewis as head coach in 2003. Carson Palmer, the future star quarterback, was drafted in 2003, but did not play a snap that whole season, as Jon Kitna had a comeback year (voted NFL Comeback Player of the Year). Despite Kitna's success, Palmer was promoted to starting quarterback the following season. The team finished with an 8\u20138 record and missed the postseason in 2004. Under Palmer, the team advanced to the playoffs for the first time since 1990 losing in the Wild Card Round to the Pittsburgh Steelers 31\u201317 in the 2005 season, which also was the first time the team had a winning percentage above .500 since 1990.\nThe Bengals returned to the playoffs again in 2009 in a season that included the franchise's first-ever division sweep. This was especially impressive since two of the teams swept by the Bengals \u2013 the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Baltimore Ravens \u2013 had made it to the AFC Championship Game the previous season. Marvin Lewis was rewarded for the accomplishment with the NFL Coach of the Year Award. In the 2010 season, the Bengals posted a 4\u201312 record.\nFollowing the disappointing 2010 season, quarterback Carson Palmer demanded to be traded. When the Bengals refused to do so, Palmer announced his retirement from the NFL. He later was moved at the NFL trade deadline to the Oakland Raiders. In the 2011 NFL draft, the Bengals selected wide receiver A. J. Green in the first round and quarterback Andy Dalton in the second round.\nThe Bengals improved to 9\u20137 in the 2011 season, and clinched a playoff spot. Dalton and Green became the most prolific rookie WR-QB duo in history, connecting 65 times for 1,057 yards. However, they lost to the Houston Texans, 31\u201310, in the Wild Card round. In the 2012 season, the Bengals clinched a playoff spot once more with a win over the Pittsburgh Steelers, going to the playoffs in back-to-back years for the first time since 1982. However, the Bengals faced the Texans in the first round yet again and took another early exit, losing 19\u201313.\nIn the 2013 season, for the third straight year, the Bengals clinched a playoff berth and also won the AFC North, finishing with an 11\u20135 record. But once again, the Bengals were defeated in the wild card round, this time by the San Diego Chargers, 27\u201310. Most of the blame was put on Andy Dalton, who threw two interceptions and fumbled on a forward dive. This made the Bengals 0\u20135 in playoff games since Mike Brown took over as owner. The 2014 season started well, with the Bengals winning their first three contests against the Baltimore Ravens, Atlanta Falcons, and Tennessee Titans. However, they lost their Week 5 road matchup with the New England Patriots, 43\u201317. An overtime tie with the Carolina Panthers and a shutout loss to the Indianapolis Colts followed the primetime loss to the Patriots. Finishing the season 10\u20135\u20131 as the fifth seed, they lost to the Colts, 26\u201310, in the first round of the playoffs. This was the first time the franchise made the playoffs four straight seasons.\nIn 2015, the Bengals got out to a franchise-best 8\u20130 start with a 31\u201310 win over the Cleveland Browns. Unfortunately, in Week 14 they would lose starting quarterback Andy Dalton to injury. He would not return that season, leaving A. J. McCarron to start under center. The Bengals finished with a franchise record-tying 12\u20134 mark. Additionally, they lost to the division rival Pittsburgh Steelers, 18\u201316, in the Wild Card round in the final minute, making them the first franchise in NFL history to lose five straight opening-round playoff games. This frustration continued in 2016 for the Bengals: they finished the 2016 campaign with a 6\u20139\u20131 record, losing several key players to injury, including A. J. Green, Giovani Bernard, and Jeremy Hill. They missed the playoffs for the first time since 2010, marking the first time Andy Dalton missed the playoffs as the Bengals' starting quarterback. One notable game was a 27\u201327 tie against the Washington Redskins which was played in London in 2016.\nFollowing a rough 2016 season, the Bengals looked forward into 2017. However, after starting 0\u20133, the Bengals never found their footing. At one point in the season, the Bengals were 5\u20139. There were rumors that Marvin Lewis would not return for the next season as the Bengals' head coach. However, after two come-from-behind victories over the Lions and Ravens that eliminated both teams from the playoffs, the Bengals finished 7\u20139. The final two games were convincing enough for owner Mike Brown to give Lewis a new two-year contract.\nThe 2018 campaign began with promise for the Bengals under Lewis. Cincinnati began the season with a 4\u20131 record with impressive wins over the Colts, Ravens, Falcons, and Dolphins. However, the Bengals suffered many setbacks after the hot start: defensive coordinator Teryl Austin was fired mid-season because of defensive woes, A. J. Green was injured and officially out for the last four games, and Andy Dalton injured his thumb in the Bengals' first game against the Browns and replaced by Jeff Driskel for the rest of the season. The Bengals ended 2018 with a final record of 6\u201310 and finished last place in the AFC North. On December 31, 2018, with one year to go on his contract, Lewis and the Bengals mutually parted ways after three straight losing seasons under his watch.\nZac Taylor years (2019\u2013present).\nIn 2019, they hired head coach Zac Taylor. The 2019 campaign started off with reasonable success, with the Bengals barely losing to Seattle 21\u201320 at CenturyLink Field; but what started with promise ended in disaster. The Bengals then lost 10 more games and were 0\u201311 heading into December 2019. To open the month of December, they got their first win of the season against the Jets, 22\u20136, in Cincinnati. They eventually lost to the Patriots and then to the Dolphins, 38\u201335, in overtime after Dalton led the team back from 23 points down in the fourth quarter. With the loss to the Dolphins, the Bengals officially clinched the No. 1 overall pick in the 2020 NFL draft. They capped off the season with a win against the Cleveland Browns, finishing 2\u201314, equaling the 2002 season as the team's worst record in history.\nIn 2020, the Bengals improved under rookies Joe Burrow and Tee Higgins. Starting the season with a 2\u20135\u20131 record going into the bye week, including an overtime tie to the Philadelphia Eagles. Going into Week 11 facing the Washington Football Team, they lost Joe Burrow to a season-ending knee injury that all but ended their season, only winning two more contests against the Pittsburgh Steelers and Houston Texans. Finishing the season 4\u201311\u20131.\nIn 2021, the Bengals won the AFC North with a 10\u20137 record, which included dominant sweeps of the rival Pittsburgh Steelers and Baltimore Ravens. Led by Joe Burrow, who was playing in his first full season after recovering from his devastating knee injury in Week 11 of his rookie season and rookie receiver, and Burrow's college teammate at LSU, Ja'Marr Chase, Cincinnati would win the AFC North for the first time since 2015. They beat the Kansas City Chiefs, 34\u201331, in a Week 17 thriller to clinch the division. They then won their first playoff game since the 1990 season, beating the Las Vegas Raiders, 26\u201319, in the Wild Card round. After that, they upset the top-seeded Tennessee Titans, 19\u201316, when Evan McPherson kicked a game-winning 52-yard field goal. A week later, they advanced to their first Super Bowl since 1989 when McPherson kicked a 33-yard field goal in overtime to cap off a comeback from being down 21\u20133 and shock the No. 2 seed Chiefs, 27\u201324. They lost a close Super Bowl to the Los Angeles Rams in Super Bowl LVI, 23\u201320.\nIn Week 1 of the 2022 NFL season, the Bengals lost, 23\u201320, to the Pittsburgh Steelers in overtime, breaking a three-game winning streak the Bengals had against Pittsburgh. After falling to a 4\u20134 record in Week 8, the Bengals proceeded to win 8 straight games to tie a franchise-record for single-season wins and earn a 3 seed in the AFC playoffs. They defeated divisional rival Baltimore in the first round 24\u201317, behind a 98-yard fumble recovery returned for a touchdown by Sam Hubbard. Despite missing three starting offensive linemen, the Bengals followed that up with a decisive 27\u201310 road win over the favored Buffalo Bills to reach a second straight AFC Championship appearance for the first time in franchise history. Once again, they faced the Kansas City Chiefs in the Championship Game, but this time they lost 23\u201320, in another thrilling game. \nIn the 2023 season, during their Week 11 matchup against the Baltimore Ravens, Joe Burrow would suffer a wrist injury that would rule him out the rest of the season. The consistent play of backup quarterback Jake Browning kept the Bengals alive in the postseason hunt after Burrow's injury. The Bengals finished the season 9\u20138 and missed the playoffs.\nThe 2024 season, with Burrow returning, came with high expectations for the Bengals; however, Cincinnati limped to a 4\u20138 start to the season thanks primarily to a porous defense; the Bengals lost four games where they scored at least 33 points; an NFL record. The team finished strong, winning their final five games to finish with a 9\u20138 record for the second straight season, however, they missed the playoffs for the second consecutive season. Burrow led the NFL in passing yards; wide receiver Ja'Marr Chase won the triple crown leading the league in receptions, receiving yards and receiving touchdowns, and defensive end Trey Hendrickson led the league in sacks.\nLogos and uniforms.\nWhen the team debuted in 1968, the Bengals' uniforms were modeled after the Cleveland Browns. When Paul Brown was fired by Art Modell, Brown still owned the equipment used by Cleveland, so after the firing, Paul Brown packed up all his equipment, which he then used for his new team in Cincinnati. The Cleveland Browns' team colors were brown, orange, and white, and their helmets were solid orange with a white dorsal stripe over the crest.\nThe Bengals' team colors were orange, black, and white, and their helmets were a similar shade of orange, with the only variations being the word \"Bengals\" in black block letters (with a white outline) on either side of the helmet and no stripe on the helmet. The Cincinnati Bengals were unique in the NFL, as they did not have secondary uniform numbers on the jerseys (called \"TV numbers\") until they appeared on the sleeves in the 1980 season; they were the only NFL team that didn't have them prior to that point. That same year, the team changed their helmet face mask color from gray to black. The team did not discard their Cleveland-like uniforms until 1981. During that year, a then-unique uniform design was introduced: Although the team kept black jerseys, white jerseys, and white pants, they were now trimmed with orange and black tiger stripes. The team also introduced the orange helmets with black tiger stripes that are still in use today. \"Sports Illustrated\" likened the Bengals' new helmets to \"varicose pumpkins.\"\nIn 1997, the Bengals designed a logo consisting of a leaping tiger, and it was added to the uniform sleeves (with this, the TV numbers moved to the shoulder). Another alternate logo consisted of a Bengal's head facing to the left. However, the orange helmet with black tiger stripes continued to be the trademark. In 2004, a new tiger stripe pattern and more accents were added to the uniforms. The black jerseys now featured orange tiger-striped sleeves and white side panels, while the white jerseys began to use black tiger-striped sleeves and orange shoulders. A new logo consisting of an orange \"B\" covered with black tiger stripes was introduced. The team also started rotating black pants and debuted an alternate orange jersey, with white side panels and black tiger-striped sleeves. The Bengals have worn their black uniforms at home throughout their history, with some exceptions, such as the 1970 season, when the Bengals wore white at home for the entire season as well as most of the 1971 season (the Bengals were the first AFL team to wear white at home, as its rules required the home team to wear their dark jerseys, unlike the NFL, which allowed the home team choice of jersey color starting in 1964). Since 2005, the Bengals have worn white for September home games where the heat could become a factor.\nIn 2016, the Bengals unveiled their all-white Color Rush alternate uniform, featuring black tiger stripes along the sleeves and pants. Orange was only used on the Nike mark, on the team logo, and as an outline color on the player's name.\nThe club announced a new uniform design on January 21, 2021. The new uniform design would be worn beginning with the 2021 NFL season. The set retains the signature striped helmet, while simplifying the look by removing the side and shoulder panels, creating a new stripe pattern for the sleeves, getting rid of the number block shadow, and removing the stroke on the player's name. This set also puts the team's wordmark on the chest and lacks TV numbers on the sleeves. The shade of orange was changed, as well. The Bengals wore three different pants with this set: black pants with orange stripes, white pants with black stripes, and white pants with orange stripes. The white pants with black stripes were worn with the white jersey in 2021 playoff games at Tennessee and Kansas City. The white pants with orange stripes were worn with the black jersey in Super Bowl LVI against the Rams.\nIn 2022, after the NFL rescinded the \"one-helmet rule,\" the Bengals unveiled an alternate black-striped white helmet. In addition, the team brought back the all-white Color Rush uniform to be paired with the white helmets. This would last one season, however, as the team decided to pair the white helmet with the primary white uniform for two games in 2023, effectively retiring the Color Rush uniform for the time being.\nIn 2024, the Bengals added orange pants to the uniform rotation after \"Madden NFL 25\" leaked the option to the public. The Bengals then unveiled a new all-orange uniform combination to be worn September 8 against the Patriots.\nMascots.\nThe team's official mascot is a Bengal tiger named Who Dey. Its jersey number is 1. Aside from Who Dey, the team also has the Ben-Gals, the team's cheerleading squad, which included Laura Vikmanis, the oldest cheerleader in league history.\nCarol Motsinger in 2015 said, \"In 2012, Cincinnati welcomed another tiger named Who Dey. This time, one that walks on four legs. More than 1,000 Bengals season ticket holders named a Malayan tiger Who Dey at Cincinnati Zoo &amp; Botanical Garden. He was recently traded to a zoo in Kansas.\"\nThe Ohio History Central notes: \"In 1940, a third American Football League formed, and the Cincinnati Bengals joined it. Unfortunately, World War II began the following year, causing manpower shortages as men joined the armed forces. This prompted this newer AFL to cease playing after the 1941 season. Paul Brown, former coach of the Cleveland Browns, received authorization from a modern American Football League to create a team in Cincinnati. Brown chose the name Bengals to memorialize the teams of the same name that had represented Cincinnati in the past.\"\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nCleveland Browns.\nThe Bengals' historic rivalry with the Cleveland Browns is often referred to as the \"Battle of Ohio\", started as the result of former Browns head coach and team founder Paul Brown starting the Bengals franchise after leaving the Browns. The colors of each team are similar since Paul Brown chose the exact shade of orange used by the Browns for the Bengals, and the Bengals' original uniforms were identical to the Browns' uniforms, excluding the word \"Bengals\" on the helmet. The rivalry reached its peak during the 1980s when both teams were vying viciously for a spot in the playoffs. During the 1990s the rivalry also butted heads when Brown's sons were in charge of the day-to-day operations of the Bengals. The Bengals lead the series 55\u201348 as of the end of the 2024 season.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nThe Bengals and Pittsburgh Steelers have played each other twice a year since becoming division rivals in 1970. This rivalry has gained intensity since the 2000s, as the teams have met twice in the playoffs, with both games being marked by hard hits and injuries with the most infamous example occurring in the 2005 playoffs. The Steelers lead the overall series 71\u201340 and the postseason series 2\u20130. However, the Steelers have been more dominant recently, posting a record of 28\u20137 since 2004, when they drafted Roethlisberger. There were two times that the rivalry has met during the playoffs: the Wild Card rounds of 2005 and 2015, with the Steelers winning both meetings at Cincinnati. The 2005 game is marked as a special time in the rivalry because this is when Steelers defensive tackle Kimo Von Oelhoffen injured Bengals quarterback Carson Palmer, while the 2015 game is also special because Bengals running back Jeremy Hill fumbled the ball in the waning minutes when the Bengals had a 16\u201315 lead over the Steelers to give the latter one last chance. They used that chance wisely as they drove down the field (with the help of two costly personal fouls by the Bengals) and kicked a game-winning field goal.\nBaltimore Ravens.\nThe Bengals' rivalry with the Baltimore Ravens began when the original Browns franchise relocated to Baltimore to become the Ravens. Since then, the rivalry heated up when longtime Ravens defensive coordinator Marvin Lewis was hired as the head coach of the Bengals. The Ravens lead the all-time series 32\u201327 as of the 2024 season. The Bengals won the only playoff meeting in the 2022 AFC Wild Card round.\nConference.\nKansas City Chiefs.\nThe Joe Burrow-led Bengals have developed a recent rivalry with the Kansas City Chiefs, with Burrow being the only AFC quarterback to date to hold a winning record against Mahomes. As of the 2024 season, the Bengals lead the all-time series 18\u201317. The teams have a 1\u20131 playoff record. The Bengals defeated the Chiefs in the 2021 AFC Championship game off of an overtime game-winning field goal while the Chiefs defeated the Bengals in the 2022 AFC Championship game off of a game-winning field goal.\nTennessee Titans.\nThe Bengals have played the Titans more than any non-divisional opponent by a significant margin. The Titans lead the all-time series 41\u201337\u20131.\nContributions to NFL culture.\nNo-huddle offense.\nA no-huddle offense was commonly used by all teams when time in the game was running low. However, Sam Wyche, the head coach of the Bengals in 1988, along with offensive coordinator Bruce Coslet, made the high-paced offense the standard modality for the ball club regardless of time remaining. By quickly substituting and setting up for the next play\u2014often within 5\u201310 seconds after the last play despite being afforded 45 seconds\u2014the Bengals hindered the other team's defense from substituting situational players, regrouping for tactics, and resting. In response, the NFL instituted rules allowing the defense ample time for substitutions when offensive substitutions were made.\nThe hurry-up tactic was used by the franchise during the late 1980s while Sam Wyche was the coach. A rival for AFC supremacy during this time was the Buffalo Bills, coached by Marv Levy, who also used a version of the no-huddle offense starting with the 1989 season. The Bengals had beaten the Bills three times in 1988 (pre-season, regular season, and the AFC Championship Game). Marv Levy threatened to fake injuries if the Bengals used the \"no-huddle\" in the AFC Championship. Wyche was notified that the commissioner had ordered the \"no-huddle\" illegal for the game. The official notified Wyche and the Bengals' team just two hours before the game kickoff. Wyche asked to talk directly to the commissioner and word immediately came back that the \"no-huddle\" would not be penalized. Levy did not have his players' fake injuries in the game but installed his version the next year, 1989. The Bengals first used the \"no-huddle\" in 1984. Most of the high-profile games (the various games for AFC titles and regular-season games) between the two led to these changes in NFL rules. Wyche also first used the timeout periods as an opportunity to bring his entire team to the sideline to talk to all eleven players, plus substitutes, at one time. This allowed trainers time to treat a cut or bruise and equipment managers time to repair an equipment defect.\nWest Coast offense.\nThe West Coast offense is the popular name for the high-percentage passing scheme designed by former Bengals assistant Bill Walsh. Walsh formulated what has become popularly known as the West Coast offense during his tenure as assistant coach for the Cincinnati Bengals from 1968 to 1975, while working under the tutelage of Brown (and before embarking on his legendary coaching tenure with the San Francisco 49ers in the 1980s). Bengals quarterback Virgil Carter was the first player to successfully implement Walsh's system, leading the NFL in pass completion percentage in 1971. Ken Anderson replaced Carter as Cincinnati's starting quarterback in 1972 and was even more successful. In 1975 he would bring widespread recognition to the West Coast offense as well as to the Cincinnati team and its quarterback in a nationally televised Monday night contest between the Bengals and a Buffalo Bills team built around the running game of star player O. J. Simpson. Anderson's 447 passing yards were enough to overcome Simpson's 197 yards on the ground in a game that proved a milestone, providing a striking contrast between the \"old\" game of defense-minded football and the new game of higher scores and more action through a sophisticated aerial attack. The game, in effect, offered its viewers a glimpse of the future of professional football. Anderson, who was drafted by Paul Brown in 1971 and installed as starting quarterback in 1972, made four trips to the Pro Bowl, won four passing titles, was named NFL MVP in 1981, and set the record for completion percentage in a single season in 1982 with 70.66%. Defeated frequently during the 1970s by the Pittsburgh Steelers, a team that won four Super Bowls with 9 future Hall of Fame players, the Bengals under Anderson and head coach Forrest Gregg would finally break through the Steel Curtain, defeating the Steelers during both of their meetings in 1980 and again in 1981. Anderson, who had been named the \"team franchise\" by Bengal tight end Bob Trumpy, would ultimately prove his worth with a career record of 91 wins and 81 losses.\nZone blitz.\nThe defense created to combat the West Coast offense also came from Cincinnati. Then-Bengals defensive coordinator Dick LeBeau (who later served as the team's head coach from 2000 to 2002) created the zone blitz in the 1980s in response to the West Coast offense.\nPlayers.\nRetired numbers.\nIn addition, Despite not being formally retired, the Bengals have certain numbers that are in limited circulation:\nPro Football Hall of Fame members.\nThere are four members of the Hall of Fame that have spent some portion of their career with the Bengals, but only Anthony Mu\u00f1oz and Ken Riley spent their entire playing careers with the Bengals. Listed below are only Hall of Famers whose induction includes their tenure with the Bengals. Bengals founder and first coach Paul Brown is in the Hall of Fame, but was inducted before founding the team and is not credited as a Bengals Hall of Famer. Additionally, the Bengals have had two head coaches, Forrest Gregg and Dick LeBeau inducted for their playing career.\n40th Anniversary Team.\nIn 2007, in celebration of their 40th anniversary the Bengals named an all-time team voted on by the fans.\n50th Anniversary Team.\nIn 2017, in celebration of their 50th anniversary, a team was created based on \"career statistics, team records and votes from the Bengals First 50.\"\nSource:\nRing of Honor.\nThe Bengals announced they would begin a Ring of Honor in 2021. The inaugural class included Pro Football Hall of Fame tackle Anthony Mu\u00f1oz and Paul Brown, who was the franchise's founder and first coach, with Ken Anderson and Ken Riley added after a season ticket holder vote.\nRadio and television.\nThe Bengals contract with iHeartMedia as their radio partner, with their flagship radio stations being WCKY (1530) and WEBN (102.7 FM), along with WLW (700) if not in conflict with the Reds. Most preseason and regular season games, are telecast on WKRC-TV, channel 12, the CBS affiliate. Mike Watts and Anthony Mu\u00f1oz are the TV announcers for preseason games, with Mike Valpredo as the sideline reporter. Games that feature an NFC opponent playing at Paycor Stadium will be televised on WXIX, channel 19, the local Fox affiliate. WLWT-TV airs games when the Bengals are featured on \"Sunday Night Football\".\nThe radio broadcasting crew consists of Dan Hoard (play-by-play), and Dave Lapham (analyst).\nCulture.\nFight song.\n\"The Bengal Growl\" is the Bengals fight song. It was written by Bengals entertainment director George \"Red\" Bird upon the team's founding in 1968. Bird had been friends with Paul Brown for over 30 years. The two had met at Massillon Washington High School when Brown was head football coach and Bird was director of the famed Massillon Tiger Swing Band. Bird had served as the Browns' music and entertainment director in 1946, and kept that role until Brown convinced him to come to Cincinnati in 1968. His first task was to pen a fight song along the lines of the Browns' fight song, \"Hi! O-Hi-O for Cleveland!\" The song remains very popular among Bengals fans, who are known to belt out the song at \"Bengals backer\" bars all over the country. In 2021, Elizabeth Blackburn, now the team's head of strategy and fan engagement, told \"The Athletic\" recalled stopping at one such bar in San Francisco during the 2015 playoffs, and was surprised to hear the viewers break out into the song. As a measure of how popular the song remains among the Bengals fan base, when Blackburn wrote an editorial on her efforts to overhaul the team's image for the Bengals Web site, Blackburn specifically mentioned that the song was not going anywhere. \"Welcome to the Jungle\" is also a fight song for the Bengals. The song is mainly played before kickoffs to intimidate visiting teams.\nWho Dey Chant.\n\"Who Dey?!\" is the name of a chant of support by fans of the Cincinnati Bengals, in use since the 1980s. The entire chant is: \"Who dey, who dey, who dey think gonna beat dem Bengals?\" The answer screamed in unison, \"Nobody.\" Sometimes fans will instead shout \"Who Dey?\" to represent the entire cheer. \"Who Dey\" is also the name of the team's mascot, a Bengal tiger.\nSaying \"Who Dey\" at Bengals games is steeped in local beer lore. Hudy, a leading product of Hudepohl Brewing Company 1978 through the late 1980s, bears a phonetic similarity to the \"Who Dey\" chant. Beer vendors who carried full cases of bottled local beer up and down the steep upper stairs of what was then Riverfront Stadium would call out \"If Hudy\", \"Burger\" and other local beer names. Raucous fans would often chant back and forth with them as the vendors called out. During the 1980 season, the banter with the Hudepohl vendors grew organically into the now famous (Hu-Dey) -Who They?- chant.\nThe full Who Dey chant was first known to be used by fans of the 1980 Cincinnati Bengals. While the origin of the chant is disputed, one possible source for the chant is a 1980 commercial for (the now-defunct) Red Frazier Ford of Cincinnati, which used this tagline: \"Who's going to give you a better deal than Red Frazier?...Nobody!\" Cincinnati fans who had seen the commercial many times may have just copied it when cheering.\nThe chant bears some similarities to the phrase \"Who Dat?\", which was officially adopted by the New Orleans Saints in 1983 but had been used by Louisiana's high school team fans for some time. The saying \"Who Dat?\" originated in minstrel shows and vaudeville acts in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, then it was taken up by New Orleans Jazz and various Big band folks in the 1920s and 1930s. In the late 1960s, local Louisiana High Schools, St. Augustine High School and Patterson High School reportedly have been using the cheer and Gulf Coast fans of Alcorn State University and Louisiana State University picked up the cheer in the 1970s. Southern University in Baton Rouge, Louisiana claims to have originated the cheer in the late 1960s in their version: \"Who dat talking 'bout beating dem Jags?\""}
{"id": "6613", "revid": "32191395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6613", "title": "Yangtze", "text": "Yangtze or Yangzi ( or ) is the longest river in Eurasia and the third-longest in the world. It rises at Jari Hill in the Tanggula Mountains of the Tibetan Plateau and flows in a generally easterly direction to the East China Sea. It is the fifth-largest primary river by discharge volume in the world. Its drainage basin comprises one-fifth of the land area of China, and is home to nearly one-third of the country's population.\nThe Yangtze has played a major role in the history, culture, and economy of China. For thousands of years, the river has been used for water, irrigation, sanitation, transportation, industry, boundary-marking, and war. The Yangtze Delta generates as much as 20% of China's GDP, and the Three Gorges Dam on the Yangtze is the largest hydro-electric power station in the world that is in use. In mid-2014, the Chinese government announced it was building a multi-tier transport network, comprising railways, roads and airports to create a new economic belt alongside the river.\nThe Yangtze flows through a wide array of ecosystems and is habitat to several endemic and threatened species, including the Chinese alligator, the narrow-ridged finless porpoise, and also was the home of the now extinct Yangtze river dolphin (or \"baiji\") and Chinese paddlefish, as well as the Yangtze sturgeon, which is extinct in the wild. In recent years, the river has suffered from industrial pollution, plastic pollution, agricultural runoff, siltation, and loss of wetland and lakes, which exacerbates seasonal flooding. Some sections of the river are now protected as nature reserves. A stretch of the upstream Yangtze flowing through deep gorges in western Yunnan is part of the Three Parallel Rivers of Yunnan Protected Areas, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nEtymology.\nChinese.\n () or \"Long River\" is the official name for the Yangtze in Mandarin Chinese. However, the Chinese have given different names to the upstream sections of the river up to its confluence with the Min River at Yibin, Sichuan. Jinsha River (\"Gold Sands River\") refers to the of the Yangtze from Yibin upstream to the confluence with the Batang River near Yushu in Qinghai, while the Tongtian River (\"River that leads to Heaven\") describes the section from Yushu up to the confluence of the Tuotuo River and the Dangqu River.\nIn Old Chinese, the Yangtze was simply called \"Jiang/Kiang\" , a character of phono-semantic compound origin, combining the water radical with the homophone (now pronounced , but \"*k\u02e4o\u014b\" in Old Chinese). \"Kong\" was probably a word in the Austroasiatic language of local peoples such as the Yue. Similar to \"*krong\" in Proto-Vietnamese and \"krung\" in Mon, all meaning \"river\", it is related to modern Vietnamese \"s\u00f4ng\" (river) and Khmer \"krung\" (city on riverside), whence Thai \"krung\" (\u0e01\u0e23\u0e38\u0e07 capital city), not \"k\u00f4ngkea\" (water) which is from the Sanskrit root \"g\u00e1\u1e45g\u0101\".\nBy the Han dynasty, had come to mean \"any\" river in Chinese, and this river was distinguished as the \"Great River\" (). The epithet (simplified version ), meaning \"long\", was first formally applied to the river during the Six Dynasties period.\nVarious sections of the Yangtze have local names. From Yibin to Yichang, the river through Sichuan and Chongqing Municipality is also known as the () or \"Sichuan River\". In Hubei, the river is also called the () or the \"Jing River\" after Jingzhou, one of the Nine Provinces of ancient China. In Anhui, the river takes on the local name after the shorthand name for Anhui, (\u7696). () or the \"Yangzi River\", from which the English name Yangtze is derived, is the local name for the Lower Yangtze in the region of Yangzhou. The name likely comes from an ancient ferry crossing called or (). Europeans who arrived in the Yangtze River Delta region applied this local name to the whole river. The dividing site between upstream and midstream is considered to be at Yichang and that between midstream and downstream at Hukou (Jiujiang).\nEnglish.\nThe river was called Quian () and Quianshui () by Marco Polo and appeared on the earliest English maps as Kian or Kiam, all recording dialects which preserved forms of the Middle Chinese pronunciation of as \"K\u00e6wng\". By the mid-19th century, these romanizations had standardized as Kiang; \"Dajiang\", e.g., was rendered as \"Ta-Kiang.\" \"Keeang-Koo,\" \"Kyang Kew,\" \"Kian-ku,\" and related names derived from mistaking the Chinese term for the mouth of the Yangtze (, \u00a0\"Ji\u0101ngk\u01d2u\") as the name of the river itself.\nThe name Blue River began to be applied in the 18th century, apparently owing to a former name of the Dam Chu or Min and to analogy with the Yellow River, but it was frequently explained in early English references as a 'translation' of \"Jiang\", \"Jiangkou\", or \"Yangzijiang\". Very common in 18th- and 19th-century sources, the name fell out of favor due to growing awareness of its lack of any connection to the river's Chinese names and to the irony of its application to such a muddy waterway.\nMatteo Ricci's 1615 Latin account included descriptions of the \"Ian\u017fu\" and \"Ian\u017fuchian.\" The posthumous account's translation of the name as Fils de la Mer (\"Son of the Ocean\") shows that Ricci, who by the end of his life was fluent in literary Chinese, was introduced to it as the homophonic rather than the usual . Further, although railroads and the Shanghai concessions subsequently turned it into a backwater, Yangzhou was the lower river's principal port for much of the Qing dynasty, directing Liangjiang's important salt monopoly and connecting the Yangtze with the Grand Canal to Beijing. (That connection also made it one of the Yellow River's principal ports between the floods of 1344 and the 1850s, during which time the Yellow River ran well south of Shandong and discharged into the ocean a mere few hundred kilometers from the mouth of the Yangtze.)\nBy 1800, English cartographers such as Aaron Arrowsmith had adopted the French style of the name as Yang-tse or Yang-tse\u00a0Kiang. The British diplomat Thomas Wade emended this to Yang-tzu Chiang as part of his formerly popular romanization of Chinese, based on the Beijing dialect instead of Nanjing's and first published in 1867. The spellings Yangtze and Yangtze\u00a0Kiang was a compromise between the two methods adopted at the 1906 Imperial Postal Conference in Shanghai, which established postal romanization. Hanyu Pinyin was adopted by the PRC's First Congress in 1958, but it was not widely employed in English outside mainland China prior to the normalization of diplomatic relations between the United States and the PRC in 1979; since that time, the spelling Yangzi has also been used.\nTibetan.\nThe source and upper reaches of the Yangtze are located in ethnic Tibetan areas of Qinghai. In Tibetan, the Tuotuo headwaters are the \"Machu\" (, lit. \"Red Water\"). The Tongtian is the \"Drichu\" (, \u2018Bri Chu\u2019), literally \"Water of the Female Yak\"; transliterated into ).\nGeography.\nThe river originates from several tributaries in the eastern part of the Tibetan Plateau, two of which are commonly referred to as the \"source.\" Traditionally, the Chinese government has recognized the source as the Tuotuo tributary at the base of a glacier lying on the west of Geladandong Mountain in the Tanggula Mountains. This source is found at and while not the furthest source of the Yangtze, it is the highest source at above sea level. The true source of the Yangtze, hydrologically the longest river distance from the sea, is at Jari Hill at the head of the Dam Qu tributary, approximately southeast of Geladandong. This source was only discovered in the late 20th century and lies in wetlands at and above sea level just southeast of Chadan Township in Zadoi County, Yushu Prefecture, Qinghai. As the historical spiritual source of the Yangtze, the Geladandong source is still commonly referred to as the source of the Yangtze since the discovery of the Jari Hill source.\nThese tributaries join and the river then runs eastward through Qinghai (Tsinghai), turning southward down a deep valley at the border of Sichuan (Szechwan) and Tibet to reach Yunnan. In the course of this valley, the river's elevation drops from above to less than . Thus, over the first of its length, the river has fallen more than .\nIt enters the basin of Sichuan at Yibin. While in the Sichuan basin, it receives several large tributaries, increasing its water volume significantly. It then cuts through Mount Wushan bordering Chongqing and Hubei to create the famous Three Gorges. Eastward of the Three Gorges, Yichang is the first city on the Yangtze Plain.\nAfter entering Hubei province, the Yangtze receives water from a number of lakes. The largest of these lakes is Dongting Lake, which is located on the border of Hunan and Hubei provinces, and is the outlet for most of the rivers in Hunan. At Wuhan, it receives its biggest tributary, the Han River, bringing water from its northern basin as far as Shaanxi.\nAt the northern tip of Jiangxi province, Lake Poyang, the biggest freshwater lake in China, merges into the river. The river then runs through Anhui and Jiangsu, receiving more water from innumerable smaller lakes and rivers, and finally reaches the East China Sea at Shanghai.\nFour of China's five main freshwater lakes contribute their waters to the Yangtze River. Traditionally, the upstream part of the Yangtze River refers to the section from Yibin to Yichang; the middle part refers to the section from Yichang to Hukou County, where Lake Poyang meets the river; the downstream part is from Hukou to Shanghai.\nThe origin of the Yangtze River has been dated by some geologists to about 45\u00a0million years ago in the Eocene, but this dating has been disputed.\nHistory.\nGeologic history.\nAlthough the mouth of the Yellow River has fluctuated widely north and south of the Shandong peninsula within the historical record, the Yangtze has remained largely static. Based on studies of sedimentation rates, however, it is unlikely that the present discharge site predates the late Miocene ( Ma). Prior to this, its headwaters drained south into the Gulf of Tonkin along or near the course of the present Red River.\nEarly history.\nThe Yangtze River is important to the cultural origins of southern China and Japan. Human activity has been verified in the Three Gorges area as far back as 27,000 years ago, and by the 5th millennium\u00a0BC, the lower Yangtze was a major population center occupied by the Hemudu and Majiabang cultures, both among the earliest cultivators of rice. By the 3rd millennium\u00a0BC, the successor Liangzhu culture showed evidence of influence from the Longshan peoples of the North China Plain. What is now thought of as Chinese culture developed along the more fertile Yellow River basin; the \"Yue\" people of the lower Yangtze possessed very different traditions blackening their teeth, cutting their hair short, tattooing their bodies, and living in small settlements among bamboo groves and were considered barbarous by the northerners.\nThe Central Yangtze valley was home to sophisticated Neolithic cultures. Later it became the earliest part of the Yangtze valley to be integrated into the North Chinese cultural sphere. (Northern Chinese were active there since the Bronze Age).\nIn the lower Yangtze, two Yue tribes, the \"Gouwu\" in southern Jiangsu and the \"Yuyue\" in northern Zhejiang, display increasing Zhou (i.e., North Chinese) influence starting in the 9th century\u00a0BC. Traditional accounts credit these changes to northern refugees (Taibo and Zhongyong in Wu and Wuyi in Yue) who assumed power over the local tribes, though these are generally assumed to be myths invented to legitimate them to other Zhou rulers. As the kingdoms of Wu and Yue, they were famed as fishers, shipwrights, and sword-smiths. Adopting Chinese characters, political institutions, and military technology, they were among the most powerful states during the later Zhou. In the middle Yangtze, the state of Jing seems to have begun in the upper Han River valley a minor Zhou polity, but it adapted to native culture as it expanded south and east into the Yangtze valley. In the process, it changed its name to Chu.\nWhether native or nativizing, the Yangtze states held their own against the northern Chinese homeland: some lists credit them with three of the Spring and Autumn period's Five Hegemons and one of the Warring States' Four Lords. They fell in against themselves, however. Chu's growing power led its rival Jin to support Wu as a counter. Wu successfully sacked Chu's capital Ying in 506\u00a0BC, but Chu subsequently supported Yue in its attacks against Wu's southern flank. In 473\u00a0BC, King Goujian of Yue fully annexed Wu and moved his court to its eponymous capital at modern Suzhou. In 333\u00a0BC, Chu finally united the lower Yangtze by annexing Yue, whose royal family was said to have fled south and established the Minyue kingdom in Fujian. Qin was able to unite China by first subduing Ba and Shu on the upper Yangtze in modern Sichuan, giving them a strong base to attack Chu's settlements along the river.\nThe state of Qin conquered the central Yangtze region, the previous heartland of Chu, in 278 BC, and incorporated the region into its expanding empire. Qin then used its connections along the Xiang River to expand into Hunan, Jiangxi and Guangdong, setting up military commanderies along the main lines of communication. At the collapse of the Qin Dynasty, these southern commanderies became the independent Nanyue Empire under Zhao Tuo while Chu and Han vied with each other for control of the north.\nSince the Han dynasty, the region of the Yangtze River grew ever more important to China's economy. The establishment of irrigation systems (the most famous one is Dujiangyan, northwest of Chengdu, built during the Warring States period) made agriculture very stable and productive, eventually exceeding even the Yellow River region. The Qin and Han empires were actively engaged in the agricultural colonization of the Yangtze lowlands, maintaining a system of dikes to protect farmland from seasonal floods. By the Song dynasty, the area along the Yangtze had become among the wealthiest and most developed parts of the country, especially in the lower reaches of the river. Early in the Qing dynasty, the region called Jiangnan (that includes the southern part of Jiangsu, the northern part of Zhejiang and Jiangxi, and the southeastern part of Anhui) provided \u2013 of the nation's revenues.\nThe Yangtze has long been the backbone of China's inland water transportation system, which remained particularly important for almost two thousand years, until the construction of the national railway network during the 20th century. The Grand Canal connects the lower Yangtze with the major cities of the Jiangnan region south of the river (Wuxi, Suzhou, Hangzhou) and with northern China (all the way from Yangzhou to Beijing). The less well known ancient Lingqu Canal, connecting the upper Xiang River with the headwaters of the Guijiang, allowed a direct water connection from the Yangtze Basin to the Pearl River Delta.\nHistorically, the Yangtze was the political boundary between north China and south China several times (see History of China) because crossing the river was difficult. This occurred notably during the Southern and Northern Dynasties, and the Southern Song. Many battles took place along the river, the most famous being the Battle of Red Cliffs in 208 AD during the Three Kingdoms period.\nThe Yangtze was the site of naval battles between the Song dynasty and Jurchen Jin during the Jin\u2013Song wars. In the Battle of Caishi of 1161, the ships of the Jin emperor Wanyan Liang clashed with the Song fleet on the Yangtze. Song soldiers fired bombs of lime and sulfur using trebuchets at the Jurchen warships. The battle was a Song victory that halted the invasion by the Jin. The Battle of Tangdao was another Yangtze naval battle in the same year.\nPolitically, Nanjing was the capital of China several times, although most of the time its territory only covered the southeastern part of China, such as the Wu kingdom in the Three Kingdoms period, the Eastern Jin Dynasty, and during the Southern and Northern Dynasties and Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms periods. Only the Ming occupied most parts of China from their capital at Nanjing, though it later moved the capital to Beijing. The ROC capital was located in Nanjing in the periods 1911\u201312, 1927\u201337, and 1945\u201349.\nAge of steam.\nThe \"Jardine\", the first steamship to sail the river, was built for Jardine, Matheson &amp; Co. in 1835. This small vessel was to carry passengers and mail between Lintin Island, Macao, and Huangpu. However, the Chinese, draconian in their application of the rules relating to foreign vessels, were unhappy about a \"fire-ship\" steaming up the Canton River. The acting Viceroy of Liangguang issued an edict warning that she would be fired on if she attempted the trip. On the \"Jardine's\" first trial run from Lintin Island the forts on both sides of the Bogue opened fire and she was forced to turn back. The Chinese authorities issued a further warning insisting that the ship leave Chinese waters. The \"Jardine\" in any case needed repairs and was sent to Singapore.&lt;br&gt;Subsequently, Lord Palmerston, the Foreign Secretary decided mainly on the \"suggestions\" of William Jardine to declare war on China. In mid-1840, a large fleet of warships appeared on the China coast, and with the first cannonball fired at a British ship, the \"Royal Saxon\", the British started the first of the Opium Wars. Royal Navy warships destroyed numerous shore batteries and Chinese warships, laying waste to several coastal forts along the way. Eventually, they pushed their way up north close enough to threaten the Imperial Palace in Beijing itself.\nThe China Navigation Company was an early shipping company founded in 1876 in London, initially to trade up the Yangtze River from their Shanghai base with passengers and cargo. Chinese coastal trade started shortly after, and in 1883 a regular service to Australia was initiated.\nNavigation on the upper river.\nSteamers came late to the upper river, the section stretching from Yichang to Chongqing. Freshets from Himalayan snowmelt created treacherous seasonal currents. But summer was better navigationally and the three gorges, described as a \"150-mile passage which is like the narrow throat of an hourglass,\" posed hazardous threats of crosscurrents, whirlpools and eddies, creating significant challenges to steamship efforts. Furthermore, Chongqing is 700 \u2013 800 feet above sea level, requiring powerful engines to make the upriver climb. Junk travel accomplished the upriver feat by employing 70\u201380 trackers, men hitched to hawsers who physically pulled ships upriver through some of the most risky and deadly sections of the three gorges.\nArchibald John Little took an interest in Upper Yangtze navigation when in 1876, the Chefoo Convention opened Chongqing to consular residence but stipulated that foreign trade might only commence once steamships had succeeded in ascending the river to that point. Little formed the Upper Yangtze Steam Navigation Co., Ltd. and built \"Kuling\" but his attempts to take the vessel further upriver than Yichang were thwarted by the Chinese authorities who were concerned about the potential loss of transit duties, competition to their native junk trade and physical damage to their craft caused by steamship wakes. \"Kuling\" was sold to China Merchants Steam Navigation Company for lower river service. In 1890, the Chinese government agreed to open Chongqing to foreign trade as long as it was restricted to native craft.\nIn 1895, the Treaty of Shimonoseki provided a provision which opened Chongqing fully to foreign trade. Little took up residence in Chongqing and built \"Leechuan\", to tackle the gorges in 1898. In March \"Leechuan\" completed the upriver journey to Chongqing but not without the assistance of trackers. \"Leechuan\" was not designed for cargo or passengers and if Little wanted to take his vision one step further, he required an expert pilot.\nIn 1898, Little persuaded Captain Samuel Cornell Plant to come out to China to lend his expertise. Captain Plant had just completed navigation of Persia's Upper Karun River and took up Little's offer to assess the Upper Yangtze on \"Leechuan\" at the end of 1898. With Plant's design input, Little had SS \"Pioneer\" built with Plant in command. In June 1900, Plant was the first to successfully pilot a merchant steamer on the Upper Yangtze from Yichang to Chongqing. \"Pioneer\" was sold to Royal Navy after its first run due to threat from the Boxer Rebellion and renamed HMS \"Kinsha\". Germany's steamship effort that same year on SS \"Suixing\" ended in catastrophe. On \"Suixing's\" maiden voyage, the vessel hit a rock and sunk, killing its captain and ending realistic hopes of regular commercial steam service on the Upper Yangtze.\nIn 1908, local Sichuan merchants and their government partnered with Captain Plant to form Sichuan Steam Navigation Company becoming the first successful service between Yichang and Chongqing. Captain Plant designed and commanded its two ships, SS \"Shutung\" and SS \"Shuhun\". Other Chinese vessels came onto the run and by 1915, foreign ships expressed their interest too. Plant was appointed by Chinese Maritime Customs Service as First Senior River Inspector in 1915. In this role, Plant installed navigational marks and established signaling systems.\nHe also wrote \"Handbook for the Guidance of Shipmasters on the Ichang-Chungking Section of the Yangtze River\", a detailed and illustrated account of the Upper Yangtze's currents, rocks, and other hazards with navigational instruction. Plant trained hundreds of Chinese and foreign pilots and issued licenses and worked with the Chinese government to make the river safer in 1917 by removing some of the most difficult obstacles and threats with explosives. In August 1917, British Asiatic Petroleum became the first foreign merchant steamship on the Upper Yangtze. Commercial firms, Robert Dollar Company, Jardine Matheson, Butterfield and Swire and Standard Oil added their own steamers on the river between 1917 and 1919. Between 1918 and 1919, Sichuan warlord violence and escalating civil war put Sichuan Steam Navigational Company out of business. \"Shutung\" was commandeered by warlords and \"Shuhun\" was brought down river to Shanghai for safekeeping.\nIn 1921, when Captain Plant died at sea while returning home to England, a Plant Memorial Fund was established to perpetuate Plant's name and contributions to Upper Yangtze navigation. The largest shipping companies in service, Butterfield &amp; Swire, Jardine Matheson, Standard Oil, Mackenzie &amp; Co., Asiatic Petroleum, Robert Dollar, China Merchants S.N. Co. and British-American Tobacco Co., contributed alongside international friends and Chinese pilots. In 1924, a 50-foot granite pyramidal obelisk was erected in Xintan, on the site of Captain Plant's home, in a Chinese community of pilots and junk owners. One face of the monument is inscribed in Chinese and another in English. Though recently relocated to higher ground ahead of the Three Gorges Dam, the monument still stands overlooking the Upper Yangtze River near Yichang, a rare collective tribute to a westerner in China.\nStandard Oil ran the tankers Mei Ping, Mei An and Mei Hsia, which were collectively destroyed on December 12, 1937, when Japanese warplanes bombed and sank the U.S.S. Panay. One of the Standard Oil captains who survived this attack had served on the Upper River for 14 years.\nContemporary events.\nChinese Communist Party chairman Mao Zedong took staged swims in the river in 1956 and 1966 at Wuhan in publicity stunts to demonstrate his health, also starting a swimming craze through party propaganda.\nIn 2002, Danish adventurer and sailor Troels Kl\u00f8vedal sailed up the Yangtze, from Shanghai to past the Three Gorges Dam, in the collectively owned \"Nordkaperen\" sailing ship. Kl\u00f8vedal had spent 12 years preparing and gathering the required permissions, and with a crew of Danes, his family members, a Chinese interpreter and several local maritime pilots, he became the first foreigner since 1949 to navigate the Yangtze. His months-long journey was documented both in his 2004 book \"Kineserne syr med lang tr\u00e5d\" and the TV show \"Kl\u00f8vedal i Kina\" by DR.\nIn August 2019, Welsh adventurer Ash Dykes became the first person to complete the trek along the course of the river, walking for 352 days from its source to its mouth.\nHydrology.\nPeriodic floods.\nTens of millions of people live in the floodplain of the Yangtze valley, an area that naturally floods every summer and is habitable only because it is protected by river dikes. The floods large enough to overflow the dikes have caused great distress to those who live and farm there. Floods of note include those of 1931, 1954, and 1998.\nThe 1931 Central China floods or the Central China floods of 1931 were a series of floods that are generally considered among the deadliest natural disasters ever recorded, and almost certainly the deadliest of the 20th century (when pandemics and famines are discounted). Estimates of the total death toll range from 145,000 to between 3.7\u00a0million and 4\u00a0million. The Yangtze flooded again in 1935, causing great loss of life.\nFrom June to September 1954, the Yangtze River Floods were a series of catastrophic floodings that occurred mostly in Hubei Province. Due to unusually high volume of precipitation as well as an extraordinarily long rainy season in the middle stretch of the Yangtze River late in the spring of 1954, the river started to rise above its usual level in around late June. Despite efforts to open three important flood gates to alleviate the rising water by diverting it, the flood level continued to rise until it hit the historic high of 44.67 m in Jingzhou, Hubei and 29.73 m in Wuhan. The number of dead from this flood was estimated at 33,000, including those who died of plague in the aftermath of the disaster.\nThe 1998 Yangtze River floods were a series of major floods that lasted from middle of June to the beginning of September 1998 along the Yangtze.\nIn the summer of 1998, China experienced massive flooding of parts of the Yangtze River, resulting in 3,704 dead, 15\u00a0million homeless and $26\u00a0billion in economic loss. Other sources report a total loss of 4150 people, and 180\u00a0million people were affected. A staggering were evacuated, 13.3\u00a0million houses were damaged or destroyed. The floods caused $26\u00a0billion in damages.\nThe 2016 China floods caused US$22\u00a0billion in damages.\nIn 2020, the Yangtze river saw the heaviest rainfall since 1961, with a 79% increase in June and July compared to the average for the period over the previous 41 years. A new theory suggested that abrupt reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols, caused by shutdowns during the COVID-19 pandemic, was a key cause of the intense downpours. Over the past decades rainfall had decreased due to increase of aerosols in the atmosphere, and lower greenhouse gas emissions in 2020 caused the opposite effect \u2013 a major increase in rain. Such a dramatic reduction of aerosols caused a dramatic change in the various components of the climate system, but such sudden change of the climate system would be very different from changes in response to continuous but gradual policy-driven emissions reductions.\nDegradation of the river.\nBeginning in the 1950s, dams and dikes were built for flood control, land reclamation, irrigation, and control of diseases vectors such as blood flukes that caused Schistosomiasis. More than a hundred lakes were thusly cut off from the main river. There were gates between the lakes that could be opened during floods. However, farmers and settlements encroached on the land next to the lakes although it was forbidden to settle there. When floods came, it proved impossible to open the gates since it would have caused substantial destruction. Thus the lakes partially or completely dried up. For example, Baidang Lake shrunk from in the 1950s to in 2005. Zhangdu Lake dwindled to one quarter of its original size. Natural fisheries output in the two lakes declined sharply. Only a few large lakes, such as Poyang Lake and Dongting Lake, remained connected to the Yangtze. Cutting off the other lakes that had served as natural buffers for floods increased the damage done by floods further downstream. Furthermore, the natural flow of migratory fish was obstructed and biodiversity across the whole basin decreased dramatically. Intensive farming of fish in ponds spread using one type of carp who thrived in eutrophic water conditions and who feeds on algae, causing widespread pollution. The pollution was exacerbated by the discharge of waste from pig farms as well as of untreated industrial and municipal sewage. In September 2012, the Yangtze river near Chongqing turned red from pollution. The erection of the Three Gorges Dam has created an impassable \"iron barrier\" that has led to a great reduction in the biodiversity of the river. Yangtze sturgeon use seasonal changes in the flow of the river to signal when is it time to migrate. However, these seasonal changes will be greatly reduced by dams and diversions. Other animals facing immediate threat of extinction are the baiji dolphin, narrow-ridged finless porpoise and the Yangtze alligator. These animals numbers went into freefall from the combined effects of accidental catches during fishing, river traffic, habitat loss and pollution. In 2006 the baiji dolphin became extinct; the world lost an entire genus.\nIn 2020, a sweeping law was passed by the Chinese government to protect the ecology of the river. The new laws include strengthening ecological protection rules for hydropower projects along the river, banning chemical plants within 1 kilometer of the river, relocating polluting industries, severely restricting sand mining as well as a complete fishing ban on all the natural waterways of the river, including all its major tributaries and lakes.\nContribution to ocean pollution.\nThe Yangtze River produces more ocean plastic pollution than any other, according to The Ocean Cleanup, a Dutch environmental research foundation that focuses on ocean pollution. Ten rivers transport 90% of all the plastic that reaches the oceans, with the Yangtze River being the biggest polluter.\nReconnecting lakes.\nIn 2002 a pilot program was initiated to reconnect lakes to the Yangtze with the objective to increase biodiversity and to alleviate flooding. The first lakes to be reconnected in 2004 were Zhangdu Lake, Honghu Lake, and Tian'e-Zhou in Hubei on the middle Yangtze. In 2005, Baidang Lake in Anhui was also reconnected.\nReconnecting the lakes improved water quality and fish were able to migrate from the river into the lake, replenishing their numbers and genetic stock. The trial also showed that reconnecting the lake reduced flooding. The new approach also benefitted the farmers economically. Pond farmers switched to natural fish feed, which helped them breed better-quality fish that can be sold for more, increasing their income by 30%. Based on the successful pilot project, other provincial governments emulated the experience and also reestablished connections to lakes that had previously been cut off from the river. In 2005 a Yangtze Forum has been established bringing together 13 riparian provincial governments to manage the river from source to sea. In 2006 China's Ministry of Agriculture made it a national policy to reconnect the Yangtze River with its lakes. As of 2010, provincial governments in five provinces and Shanghai set up a network of 40 effective protected areas, covering . As a result, populations of 47 threatened species increased, including the critically endangered Yangtze alligator. In the Shanghai area, reestablished wetlands now protect drinking water sources for the city. It is envisaged to extend the network throughout the entire Yangtze to eventually cover 102 areas and . The mayor of Wuhan announced that six huge, stagnating urban lakes including the East Lake (Wuhan) would be reconnected at the cost of US$2.3\u00a0billion creating China's largest urban wetland landscape.\nCrossings.\nUntil 1957, there were no bridges across the Yangtze River from Yibin to Shanghai. For millennia, travelers crossed the river by ferry. On occasions, the crossing may have been dangerous, as evidenced by the \"Zhong'anlun\" disaster (October 15, 1945).\nThe river stood as a major geographic barrier dividing northern and southern China. In the first half of the 20th century, rail passengers from Beijing to Guangzhou and Shanghai had to disembark, respectively, at Hanyang and Pukou, and cross the river by steam ferry before resuming journeys by train from Wuchang or Nanjing West.\nAfter the founding of the People's Republic in 1949, Soviet engineers assisted in the design and construction of the Wuhan Yangtze River Bridge, a dual-use road-rail bridge, built from 1955 to 1957. It was the first bridge across the Yangtze River. The second bridge across the river that was built was a single-track railway bridge built upstream in Chongqing in 1959. The Nanjing Yangtze River Bridge, also a road-rail bridge, was the first bridge to cross the lower reaches of the Yangtze, in Nanjing. It was built after the Sino-Soviet Split and did not receive foreign assistance. Road-rail bridges were then built in Zhicheng (1971) and Chongqing (1980).\nBridge-building slowed in the 1980s before resuming in the 1990s and accelerating in the first decade of the 21st century. The Jiujiang Yangtze River Bridge was built in 1992 as part of the Beijing-Jiujiang Railway. A second bridge in Wuhan was completed in 1995. By 2005, there were a total of 56 bridges and one tunnel across the Yangtze River between Yibin and Shanghai. These include some of the longest suspension and cable-stayed bridges in the world on the Yangtze Delta: Jiangyin Suspension Bridge (1,385 m, opened in 1999), Runyang Bridge (1,490 m, opened 2005), Sutong Bridge (1,088 m, opened 2008). The rapid pace of bridge construction has continued. The city of Wuhan now has six bridges and one tunnel across the Yangtze.\nA number of power line crossings have also been built across the river.\nDams.\nAs of 2007, there are two dams built on the Yangtze river: Three Gorges Dam and Gezhouba Dam. The Three Gorges Dam is the largest power station in the world by installed capacity, at 22.5 GW. Several dams are operating or are being constructed on the upper portion of the river, the Jinsha River. Among them, the Baihetan Dam is the second largest after the Three Gorges Dam, and the Xiluodu Dam is the 4th largest power station in the world.\nTributaries.\nThe Yangtze River has over 700 tributaries. The major tributaries (listed from upstream to downstream) with the locations of where they join the Yangtze are:\nThe Huai River flowed into the Yellow Sea until the 20th century, but now primarily discharges into the Yangtze.\nWildlife.\nThe Yangtze River has a high species richness, including many endemics. A high percentage of these are seriously threatened by human activities.\nFish.\n, 416 fish species are known from the Yangtze basin, including 362 that strictly are freshwater species. The remaining are also known from salt or brackish waters, such as the river's estuary or the East China Sea. This makes it one of the most species-rich rivers in Asia and by far the most species-rich in China (in comparison, the Pearl River has almost 300 fish species and the Yellow River 160). 178 fish species are endemic to the Yangtze River Basin. Many are only found in some section of the river basin and especially the upper reach (above Yichang, but below the headwaters in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau) is rich with 279 species, including 147 Yangtze endemics and 97 strict endemics (found only in this part of the basin). In contrast, the headwaters, where the average altitude is above , are only home to 14 highly specialized species, but 8 of these are endemic to the river. The largest orders in the Yangtze are Cypriniformes (280 species, including 150 endemics), Siluriformes (40 species, including 20 endemics), Perciformes (50 species, including 4 endemics), Tetraodontiformes (12 species, including 1 endemic) and Osmeriformes (8 species, including 1 endemic). No other order has more than four species in the river and one endemic.\nMany Yangtze fish species have declined drastically and 65 were recognized as threatened in the 2009 Chinese red list. Among these are three that are considered entirely extinct (Chinese paddlefish, \"Anabarilius liui liui\" and \"Atrilinea macrolepis\"), two that are extinct in the wild (\"Anabarilius polylepis\", \"Schizothorax parvus\"), four that are critically endangered \"Euchiloglanis kishinouyei\", \"Megalobrama elongata\", \"Schizothorax longibarbus\" and \"Leiocassis longibarbus\"). Additionally, both the Yangtze sturgeon and Chinese sturgeon are considered critically endangered by the IUCN. The survival of these two sturgeon may rely on the continued release of captive bred specimens. Although still listed as critically endangered rather than extinct by both the Chinese red list and IUCN, recent reviews have found that the Chinese paddlefish is extinct. Surveys conducted between 2006 and 2008 by ichthyologists failed to catch any, but two probable specimens were recorded with hydroacoustic signals. The last definite record was an individual that was accidentally captured near Yibin in 2003 and released after having been radio tagged. The Chinese sturgeon is the largest fish in the river and among the largest freshwater fish in the world, reaching a length of ; the extinct Chinese paddlefish reputedly reached as much as , but its maximum size is labeled with considerable uncertainty.\nThe largest threats to the Yangtze native fish are overfishing and habitat loss (such as building of dams and land reclamation), but pollution, destructive fishing practices (such as fishing with dynamite or poison) and introduced species also cause problems. About of the total freshwater fisheries in China are in the Yangtze Basin, but a drastic decline in size of several important species has been recorded, as highlighted by data from lakes in the river basin. In 2015, some experts recommend a 10-year fishing moratorium to allow the remaining populations to recover, and in January 2020 China imposed a 10-year fishing moratorium on 332 sites along the Yangtze. Dams present another serious problem, as several species in the river perform breeding migrations and most of these are non-jumpers, meaning that normal fish ladders designed for salmon are ineffective. For example, the Gezhouba Dam blocked the migration of the paddlerfish and two sturgeon, while also effectively splitting the Chinese high fin banded shark population into two and causing the extirpation of the Yangtze population of the Japanese eel. In an attempt of minimizing the effect of the dams, the Three Gorges Dam has released water to mimic the (pre-dam) natural flooding and trigger the breeding of carp species downstream. In addition to dams already built in the Yangtze basin, several large dams are planned and these may present further problems for the native fauna.\nWhile many fish species native to the Yangtze are seriously threatened, others have become important in fish farming and introduced widely outside their native range. A total of 26 native fish species of the Yangtze basin are farmed. Among the most important are four Asian carp: grass carp, black carp, silver carp and bighead carp. Other species that support important fisheries include northern snakehead, Chinese perch, \"Takifugu\" pufferfish (mainly in the lowermost sections) and predatory carp.\nOther animals.\nDue to commercial use of the river, tourism, and pollution, the Yangtze is home to several seriously threatened species of large animals (in addition to fish): the narrow-ridged finless porpoise, baiji (Yangtze river dolphin), Chinese alligator, Yangtze giant softshell turtle and Chinese giant salamander. This is the only other place besides the United States that is native to an alligator and paddlefish species. In 2010, the Yangtze population of finless porpoise was 1000 individuals. In December 2006, the Yangtze river dolphin was declared functionally extinct after an extensive search of the river revealed no signs of the dolphin's inhabitance. In 2007, a large, white animal was sighted and photographed in the lower Yangtze and was tentatively presumed to be a \"baiji\". However, as there have been no confirmed sightings since 2004, the \"baiji\" is presumed to be functionally extinct at this time. \"Baijis were the last surviving species of a large lineage dating back seventy million years and one of only six species of freshwater dolphins.\" It has been argued that the extinction of the Yangtze river dolphin was a result of the completion of the Three Gorges Dam, a project that has affected many species of animals and plant life found only in the gorges area.\nNumerous species of land mammals are found in the Yangtze valley, but most of these are not directly associated with the river. Three exceptions are the semi-aquatic Eurasian otter, water deer and P\u00e8re David's deer.\nIn addition to the very large and exceptionally rare Yangtze giant softshell turtle, several smaller turtle species are found in the Yangtze basin, its delta and valleys. These include the Chinese box turtle, yellow-headed box turtle, Pan's box turtle, Yunnan box turtle, yellow pond turtle, Chinese pond turtle, Chinese stripe-necked turtle and Chinese softshell turtle, which all are considered threatened.\nMore than 160 amphibian species are known from the Yangtze basin, including the world's largest, the critically endangered Chinese giant salamander. It has declined drastically due to hunting (it is considered a delicacy), habitat loss and pollution. The polluted Dian Lake, which is part of the upper Yangtze watershed (via Pudu River), is home to several highly threatened fish, but was also home to the Yunnan lake newt. This newt has not been seen since 1979 and is considered extinct. In contrast, the Chinese fire belly newt from the lower Yangtze basin is one of the few Chinese salamander species to remain common and it is considered least concern by the IUCN.\nThe Yangtze basin contains a large number of freshwater crab species, including several endemics. A particularly rich genus in the river basin is the potamid \"Sinopotamon\". The Chinese mitten crab is catadromous (migrates between fresh and saltwater) and it has been recorded up to up the Yangtze, which is the largest river in its native range. It is a commercially important species in its native range where it is farmed, but the Chinese mitten crab has also been spread to Europe and North America where considered invasive.\nThe freshwater jellyfish \"Craspedacusta sowerbii\", now an invasive species in large parts of the world, originates from the Yangtze.\nTourism.\nThe Yangtze River cruise, also called the \"Three Gorges cruise\", is a popular tourist attraction."}
{"id": "6614", "revid": "39066525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6614", "title": "Chrono Trigger", "text": " is a 1995 role-playing video game by Square. It was originally released for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System as the first entry in the \"Chrono\" series. The game's development team included three designers that Square dubbed the \"Dream Team\": Hironobu Sakaguchi, creator of Square's \"Final Fantasy\" series; Yuji Horii, creator of Enix's \"Dragon Quest\" series; and Akira Toriyama, character designer of \"Dragon Quest\" and author of the \"Dragon Ball\" manga series. In addition, Takashi Tokita co-directed the game and co-wrote the scenario, Kazuhiko Aoki produced the game, while Masato Kato wrote most of the story. The game's plot follows a group of adventurers who travel through time to prevent a global catastrophe.\n\"Chrono Trigger\" was a critical and commercial success upon release, receiving multiple accolades from gaming publications, and is considered one of fourth-generation console gaming's most significant titles and among the greatest video games ever made. \"Nintendo Power\" magazine described aspects of the game as revolutionary, including its multiple endings, plot-related side-quests focusing on character development, unique battle system, and detailed graphics. The game's soundtrack, scored by Yasunori Mitsuda with assistance from veteran \"Final Fantasy\" composer Nobuo Uematsu, has been hailed as one of the best video game soundtracks of all time. \"Chrono Trigger\" was the second best-selling game of 1995 in Japan, and the various incarnations of the game have shipped more than 3.5 million copies worldwide.\nDistributed in the Japanese and North American markets in 1995, the game has been re-released on several other platforms with varying differences. Square published a ported version by Tose in Japan for the PlayStation in 1999, which was later repackaged with a \"Final Fantasy IV\" port as \"Final Fantasy Chronicles\" (2001) exclusively in North America. A slightly enhanced \"Chrono Trigger\", again ported by Tose, was released for the Nintendo DS in Japan and North America in 2008, and PAL regions in 2009. The game has also been ported to i-mode, the Virtual Console, the PlayStation Network, iOS, and Android. In 2018, a higher resolution version was released for Windows via Steam.\nGameplay.\n\"Chrono Trigger\" features standard role-playing video game gameplay. The player controls the protagonist and his companions in the game's two-dimensional world, consisting of various forests, cities, and dungeons. Navigation occurs via an overworld map, depicting the landscape from a scaled-down overhead view. Areas such as forests, cities, and similar places are depicted as more realistic scaled-down maps, in which players can converse with locals to procure items and services, solve puzzles and challenges, or encounter enemies. \"Chrono Trigger\" gameplay deviates from that of traditional Japanese RPGs in that, rather than appearing in random encounters, many enemies are openly visible on field maps or lie in wait to ambush the party. Contact with enemies on a field map initiates a battle that occurs directly on the map rather than on a separate battle screen.\nPlayers and enemies may use physical or magical attacks to wound targets during battle, and players may use items to heal or protect themselves. Each character and enemy has a certain number of hit points; successful attacks reduce that character's hit points, which can be restored with potions and spells. When a playable character loses all hit points, they faint; if all the player's characters fall in battle, the game ends and must be restored from a previously saved chapter, except in specific storyline-related battles that allow or force the player to lose. Between battles, a player can equip their characters with weapons, armor, helmets, and accessories that provide special effects (such as increased attack power or defense against magic), and various consumable items can be used both in and out of battles. Items and equipment can be purchased in shops or found on field maps, often in treasure chests. By exploring new areas and fighting enemies, players progress through \"Chrono Trigger\" story.\n\"Chrono Trigger\" uses an \"Active Time Battle\" system\u2014a recurring element of Square's \"Final Fantasy\" game series designed by Hiroyuki Ito for \"Final Fantasy IV\"\u2014named \"Active Time Battle 2.0\". Each character can take action in battle once a personal timer dependent on the character's speed statistic counts to zero. Magic and special physical techniques are handled through a system called \"Techs\". Techs deplete a character's magic points (a numerical meter similar to hit points), and often have special areas of effect; some spells damage huddled monsters, while others can harm enemies spread in a line. Enemies often change positions during battle, creating opportunities for tactical Tech use. A unique feature of \"Chrono Trigger\" Tech system is that numerous cooperative techniques exist. Each character receives eight personal Techs which can be used in conjunction with others' to create Double and Triple Techs for greater effect. For instance, Crono's sword-spinning Cyclone Tech can be combined with Lucca's Flame Toss to create Fire Whirl. When characters with compatible Techs have enough magic points available to perform their techniques, the game automatically displays the combo as an option.\n\"Chrono Trigger\" features several other distinct gameplay traits, including time travel. Players have access to seven eras of the game world's history, and past actions affect future events. Throughout history, players find new allies, complete side quests, and search for keynote villains. Time travel is accomplished via portals and pillars of light called \"time gates\", as well as a time machine named \"Epoch\". The game contains twelve unique endings (thirteen in DS, iOS, Android and Steam versions); the ending the player receives depends on when and how they reach and complete the game's final battle. The DS version of \"Chrono Trigger\" features a new ending that can be accessed from the End of Time upon completion of the final extra dungeon and optional final boss. \"Chrono Trigger\" also introduces a New Game Plus option; after completing the game, the player may begin a new game with the same character levels, techniques, and equipment, excluding money, with which they ended the previous playthrough. However, certain items central to the storyline are removed and must be found again, such as the sword Masamune. Square has employed the New Game Plus concept in later games including \"Chrono Cross\" and \"Final Fantasy XV\" among others.\nStory.\nSetting.\n\"Chrono Trigger\" takes place in an Earth-like world, with eras such as the prehistoric age, in which primitive humans and dinosaurs share the earth; the Middle Ages, replete with knights, monsters, and magic; and the post-apocalyptic future, where destitute humans and sentient robots struggle to survive. The characters frequently travel through time to obtain allies, gather equipment, and learn information to help them in their quest. The party also gains access to the End of Time (represented as year \u221e), which serves as a hub to travel back to other time periods. The party eventually acquires a time-machine vehicle known as the \"Wings of Time,\" nicknamed the \"Epoch\" (this default name can be changed by the player when the vehicle is acquired). The vehicle is capable of time travel between any time period without first having to travel to the End of Time.\nCharacters.\n\"Chrono Trigger\" six playable characters (plus one optional character) come from different eras of history. \"Chrono Trigger\" begins in 1000 AD with Crono, Marle, and Lucca. Crono is the silent protagonist, characterized as a fearless young man who wields a katana in battle. Marle, revealed to be Princess Nadia, lives in Guardia Castle; though sheltered, she is at heart a princess who seeks independence from her royal identity. Lucca is a childhood friend of Crono's and a mechanical genius; her home is filled with laboratory equipment and machinery. From the era of 2300 AD comes Robo, or Prometheus (designation R-66Y), a robot with a near-human personality created to assist humans. Lying dormant in the future, Robo is found and repaired by Lucca, and joins the group out of gratitude. The fiercely confident Ayla dwells in 65,000,000 BC. Unmatched in raw strength, Ayla is the chief of Ioka Village and leads her people in war against a species of humanoid reptiles known as Reptites.\nThe last two playable characters are Frog and Magus. Frog originated in 600 AD. He is a former squire once known as Glenn, who was turned into an anthropomorphic frog by Magus, who also killed his friend Cyrus. Chivalrous but mired in regret, Frog dedicates his life to protecting Leene, the queen of Guardia, and avenging Cyrus. Meanwhile, Guardia in 600 AD is in a state of conflict against the Mystics (known as Fiends in the US/DS port), a race of demons and intelligent animals who wage war against humanity under the leadership of Magus, a powerful sorcerer. Magus's seclusion conceals a long-lost past; he was formerly known as Janus, the young prince of the Kingdom of Zeal, which was destroyed by Lavos in 12,000 BC. The incident sent him forward through time, and as he ages, he plots revenge against Lavos and broods over the fate of his sister, Schala. Lavos, the game's main antagonist who awakens and ravages the world in 1999 AD, is an extraterrestrial, parasitic creature that harvests DNA and the Earth's energy for its own growth.\nPlot.\nIn 1000 AD, Crono and Marle watch Lucca and her father demonstrate her new teleporter at the Millennial Fair in the Kingdom of Guardia. When Marle volunteers to be teleported, her pendant interferes with the device and creates a time portal into which she is drawn. After Crono and Lucca separately recreate the portal and find themselves in 600 AD, they locate Marle, only to see her vanish before their eyes. Lucca realizes that this time period's kingdom has mistaken Marle (who is actually Princess Nadia of Guardia) for Queen Leene, an ancestor of hers who had been kidnapped, thus putting off the recovery effort for her ancestor and creating a grandfather paradox. Crono and Lucca, with the help of Frog, restore history to normal by rescuing Leene. After the three part ways with Frog and return to the present, Crono is framed for kidnapping Marle and sentenced to death by the current chancellor of Guardia. Lucca and Marle help Crono escape prison, haphazardly using another time portal to evade their pursuers. This portal lands them in 2300 AD, where they learn that an advanced civilization has been wiped out by a giant creature known as Lavos that appeared in 1999 AD, and find the last remnants of humanity living in underground domes subsisting off of machine energy in place of food. The three vow to find a way to prevent the future destruction of their world. After meeting and repairing Robo, Crono and his friends find Gaspar, an old sage residing in an atemporal space known as the End of Time, who offers them the ability to travel through time by way of several pillars of light. (The party is able to challenge Lavos at any point after this scene, with completion of the game prior to its final chapter unlocking one of twelve different endings.)\nThe party discover that a powerful mage named Magus summoned Lavos into the world in 600 AD. To stop Magus, Frog requires the legendary sword, Masamune, to open the way to the mage's castle. In search of ore to re-forge the sword, the party travel to prehistoric times and meet Ayla, the chief of an ancient hunter-gatherer tribe. The subsequent battle with Magus disrupts his spell to summon Lavos, opening a temporal distortion that throws Crono and his friends to prehistory. The party assist Ayla in battling the Reptites, enemies of prehistoric humans. The battle is cut short as the party witness the true origin of Lavos, who descends from deep space and crashes into the planet before burrowing to its core. Entering a time gate created by Lavos's impact, the party arrive in the ice age of 12,000 BC. There, the utopic Kingdom of Zeal resides on islands raised above the icy surface using energy harnessed from Lavos's body beneath the earth's crust via a machine housed on the ocean floor. The party are imprisoned by the Queen of Zeal on the orders of its mysterious Prophet, and are ultimately banished, with the time gate leading to 12,000 BC sealed by the Prophet. Seeking a way to return, the party discover a time machine in 2300 AD called the Wings of Time (or \"Epoch\"), which can access any time period at will. The party return to 12,000 BC, where Zeal inadvertently awakens Lavos, leading the Prophet to reveal himself as Magus, who tries and fails to kill the creature. Lavos defeats Magus and kills Crono, before the remaining party are transported to the safety of the surface by Schala, Zeal\u2019s princess. Lavos annihilates the Kingdom of Zeal, whose fallen continent causes devastating floods that submerge most of the world's landmass.\nMagus confesses to the party that he used to be Prince Janus of Zeal, Schala\u2019s brother, and that in the original timeline, he and the Gurus of Zeal were scattered across time by Lavos's awakening in 12,000 BC. Stranded as a child in 600 AD, Janus took the title of Magus and gained a cult of followers while plotting to summon and kill Lavos in revenge for the death of his sister. Magus tried once more after the party's battle in his castle returned him to Zeal, where he disguised himself as the Prophet. At this point, Magus is either killed by the party, killed in a duel with Frog, or spared and convinced to join the party. The ruined Ocean Palace then rises into the air as the Black Omen, Queen Zeal's floating fortress. The group turns to Gaspar for help, and he gives them a \"Chrono Trigger\", a device that allows the group to replace Crono just before the moment of death with an identical doppelg\u00e4nger (doing so is optional, and the game's ending will change depending on the player's decision). The party then gather power by helping people across time with Gaspar's instructions. Their journeys involve defeating the remnants of the Mystics, stopping Robo's maniacal AI creator, giving Frog closure for Cyrus's death, locating and charging up the mythical Sun Stone, retrieving the legendary Rainbow Shell, unmasking Guardia's Chancellor as a saboteur, restoring a forest destroyed by a desert monster, and preventing an accident that disabled Lucca's mother. The party then enter the Black Omen and defeat Queen Zeal, after which they battle Lavos. They discover that Lavos is self-directing his evolution via absorbing DNA and energy from every living creature before razing the planet's surface in 1999 AD, so that it could spawn a new generation to destroy other worlds and continue the evolutionary cycle. The party slay Lavos, and celebrate at the final night of the Millennial Fair before returning to their own times.\nIf Magus joined the party, he departs to search for Schala. If Crono was resurrected before defeating Lavos, his sentence for kidnapping Marle is revoked by her father, King Guardia XXXIII, thanks to testimonies from Marle's ancestors and descendants, whom Crono had helped during his journey. Crono's mother accidentally enters the time gate at the Millennial Fair before it closes, prompting Crono, Marle, and Lucca to set out in the Epoch to find her while fireworks light up the night sky. If Crono was not resurrected, Frog, Robo, and Ayla (along with Magus if he was recruited) chase Gaspar to the Millennial Fair and back again, revealing that Gaspar knows how to resurrect Crono; Marle and Lucca then use the Epoch to travel through time to accomplish this. Alternatively, if the party used the Epoch to break Lavos's outer shell, Marle will help her father hang Nadia's bell at the festival and accidentally get carried away by several balloons. If resurrected, Crono jumps on to help her, but cannot bring them down to earth. Hanging on in each other's arms, the pair travel through the cloudy, moonlit sky.\n\"Chrono Trigger DS\" added two new scenarios to the game. In the first, Crono and his friends can help a \"lost sanctum\" of Reptites, who reward powerful items and armor. The second scenario adds ties to \"Trigger\" sequel, \"Chrono Cross\". In a New Game Plus, the group can explore several temporal distortions to combat shadow versions of Crono, Marle, and Lucca, and to fight Dalton, who promises in defeat to raise an army in the town of Porre to destroy the Kingdom of Guardia. The group can then fight the Dream Devourer, a prototypical form of the \"Time Devourer\"\u2014a fusion of Schala and Lavos seen in \"Chrono Cross\". A version of Magus pleads with Schala to resist; though she recognizes him as her brother, she refuses to be helped and sends him away. Schala subsequently erases his memories and Magus awakens in a forest, determined to find what he had lost.\nDevelopment.\n\"Chrono Trigger\" was conceived in October 1992 by Hironobu Sakaguchi, producer and creator of the \"Final Fantasy\" series; Yuji Horii, writer, game designer and creator of the \"Dragon Quest\" series; and Akira Toriyama, character designer of \"Dragon Quest\" and creator of the \"Dragon Ball\" manga series. Traveling to the United States to research computer graphics, the three, that Square dubbed the \"Dream Team\", decided to create something that \"no one had done before\". Toriyama's editor, Kazuhiko Torishima, later credited the concept to a fusion of \"Dragon Quest plus Final Fantasy\", and arranged for Enix to lend Yuji Horii to Squaresoft for development. After spending over a year considering the difficulties of developing a new game, the three received a call from Kazuhiko Aoki, who offered to produce. The four met and spent four days brainstorming ideas for the game. Square convened 50\u201360 developers, including scenario writer Masato Kato, whom Square designated story planner; development started in early 1993. An uncredited Square employee suggested that the team develop a time travel-themed game, which Kato initially opposed, fearing repetitive, dull gameplay. Kato and Horii then met several hours per day during the first year of development to write the game's plot; Horii desired a silent protagonist from the outset. Square intended to license the work under the \"Mana\" franchise and gave it the working title \"Maru Island\"; Hiromichi Tanaka (the future producer of \"Chrono Cross\") monitored Toriyama's early designs. The team hoped to release it on Nintendo's planned Super Famicom Disk Drive; when Nintendo canceled the project, Square reoriented the game for release on a Super Famicom cartridge and rebranded it as \"Chrono Trigger\". Tanaka credited the ROM cartridge platform for enabling seamless transition to battles on the field map. While \"Chrono Trigger\" had been planned for a 24-megabit cartridge, Square ultimately chose a 32-megabit platform, enabling additional graphics and music. Torishima later reflected that at least one early revision of the game had been scrapped.\nAoki ultimately produced \"Chrono Trigger\", while director credits were attributed to Akihiko Matsui, Yoshinori Kitase and Takashi Tokita. Toriyama designed the game's aesthetic, including characters, monsters, vehicles, and the look of each era. Masato Kato also contributed character ideas and designs. Kato planned to feature Gaspar as a playable character and Toriyama sketched him, but he was cut early in development. The development staff studied the drawings of Toriyama to approximate his style. Sakaguchi and Horii supervised; Sakaguchi was responsible for the game's overall system and contributed several monster ideas. Other notable designers include Tetsuya Takahashi, the graphic director, and Yasuyuki Honne, Tetsuya Nomura, and Yusuke Naora, who worked as field graphic artists. Yasuhiko Kamata programmed graphics, and cited Ridley Scott's visual work in the film \"Alien\" as an inspiration for the game's lighting. Kamata made the game's luminosity and color choice lay between that of \"Secret of Mana\" and the \"Final Fantasy\" series. Features originally intended to be used in \"Secret of Mana\" or \"Final Fantasy IV\", also under development at the same time, were appropriated by the \"Chrono Trigger\" team. According to Tanaka, \"Secret of Mana\" (which itself was originally intended to be \"Final Fantasy IV\") was codenamed \"Chrono Trigger\" during development before being called \"Seiken Densetsu 2\" (\"Secret of Mana\"), and then the name \"Chrono Trigger\" was adopted for a new project. After its release, the development team of \"Final Fantasy VI\" was folded into the \"Chrono Trigger\" team.\nYuji Horii, a fan of time travel fiction (such as the TV series \"The Time Tunnel\"), fostered a theme of time travel in his general story outline of \"Chrono Trigger\" with input from Akira Toriyama. Horii liked the scenario of the grandfather paradox surrounding Marle. Concerning story planning, Horii commented, \"If there's a fairground, I just write that there's a fairground; I don't write down any of the details. Then the staff brainstorm and come up with a variety of attractions to put in.\" Horii also devised Lavos as the final boss, having wanted the final boss to be an ancient evil. Sakaguchi contributed some minor elements, including the character Gato; he liked Marle's drama and reconciliation with her father. Masato Kato subsequently edited and completed the outline by writing the majority of the game's story, including all the events of the 12,000 BC era. He took pains to avoid what he described as \"a long string of errands [...] [such as] 'do this', 'take this', 'defeat these monsters', or 'plant this flag'.\" Kato and other developers held a series of meetings to ensure continuity, usually attended by around 30 personnel. Kato and Horii initially proposed Crono's death, though they intended he stay dead; the party would have retrieved an earlier, living version of him to complete the quest. Square deemed the scenario too depressing and asked that Crono be brought back to life later in the story. Kato also devised the system of multiple endings because he could not branch the story out to different paths. Yoshinori Kitase and Takashi Tokita then wrote various subplots. They also devised an \"Active Time Event Logic\" system, \"where you can move your character around during scenes, even when an NPC is talking to you\", and with players \"talking to different people and steering the conversation in different directions\", allowing each scene to \"have many permutations.\" Kato became friends with composer Yasunori Mitsuda during development, and they would collaborate on several future projects. Katsuhisa Higuchi programmed the battle system, which hosted combat on the map without transition to a special battleground as most previous Square games had done. Higuchi noted extreme difficulty in loading battles properly without slow-downs or a brief, black loading screen. The game's use of animated monster sprites consumed much more memory than previous \"Final Fantasy\" games, which used static enemy graphics.\nHironobu Sakaguchi likened the development of \"Chrono Trigger\" to \"play[ing] around with Toriyama's universe,\" citing the inclusion of humorous sequences in the game that would have been \"impossible with something like \"Final Fantasy\".\" When Square suggested a non-human player character, developers created Frog by adapting one of Toriyama's sketches. The team created the End of Time to help players with hints, worrying that they might become stuck and need to consult a walkthrough. The game's testers had previously complained that \"Chrono Trigger\" was too difficult; as Horii explained, \"It's because we know too much. The developers think the game's just right; that they're being too soft. They're thinking from their own experience. The puzzles were the same. Lots of players didn't figure out things we thought they'd get easily.\" Sakaguchi later cited the unusual desire of beta testers to play the game a second time or \"travel through time again\" as an affirmation of the New Game Plus feature: \"Wherever we could, we tried to make it so that a slight change in your behavior caused subtle differences in people's reactions, even down to the smallest details [...] I think the second playthrough will hold a whole new interest.\" The game's reuse of locations due to time traveling made bug-fixing difficult, as corrections would cause unintended consequences in other eras.\nMusic.\n\"Chrono Trigger\" was scored primarily by Yasunori Mitsuda, with contributions from veteran \"Final Fantasy\" composer Nobuo Uematsu and one track by Noriko Matsueda. A sound programmer at the time, Mitsuda was unhappy with his pay and threatened to leave Square if he could not compose music. Hironobu Sakaguchi suggested he score \"Chrono Trigger\", remarking, \"maybe your salary will go up.\" Mitsuda composed new music and drew on a personal collection of pieces composed over the previous two years. He reflected, \"I wanted to create music that wouldn't fit into any established genre [...] music of an imaginary world. The game's director, Masato Kato, was my close friend, and so I'd always talk with him about the setting and the scene before going into writing.\" Mitsuda slept in his studio several nights, and attributed certain pieces\u2014such as the game's ending theme, \"To Far Away Times\"\u2014to inspiring dreams. He later attributed this song to an idea he was developing before \"Chrono Trigger\", reflecting that the tune was made in dedication to \"a certain person with whom [he] wanted to share a generation\". He also tried to use leitmotifs of the \"Chrono Trigger\" main theme to create a sense of consistency in the soundtrack. Mitsuda wrote each tune to be around two minutes long before repeating, unusual for Square's games at the time. Mitsuda suffered a hard drive crash that lost around forty in-progress tracks. After Mitsuda contracted stomach ulcers, Uematsu joined the project to compose ten pieces and finish the score. Mitsuda returned to watch the ending with the staff before the game's release, crying upon seeing the finished scene.\nAt the time of the game's release, the number of tracks and sound effects was unprecedented\u2014the soundtrack spanned three discs in its 1995 commercial pressing. Square also released a one-disc acid jazz arrangement called \"The Brink of Time\" by Guido that year. \"The Brink of Time\" came about because Mitsuda wanted to do something that no one else was doing, and he noted that acid jazz and its related genres were uncommon in the Japanese market. Mitsuda considers \"Chrono Trigger\" a landmark game which helped mature his talent. While Mitsuda later held that the title piece was \"rough around the edges\", he maintains that it had \"significant influence on [his] life as a composer\". In 1999, Square produced another one-disc soundtrack to complement the PlayStation release of the game, featuring orchestral tracks used in cutscenes. Tsuyoshi Sekito composed four new pieces for the game's bonus features which weren't included on the soundtrack. Some fans were displeased by Mitsuda's absence in creating the port, whose instruments sometimes aurally differed from the original game's. Mitsuda arranged versions of music from the \"Chrono\" series for Play! video game music concerts, presenting the main theme, \"Frog's Theme\", and \"To Far Away Times\". He worked with Square Enix to ensure that the music for the Nintendo DS would sound closer to the Super NES version. Mitsuda encouraged feedback about the game's soundtrack from contemporary children (who he thought would expect \"full symphonic scores blaring out of the speakers\"). Fans who preordered the DS version received a special music disc containing two orchestral arrangements of the game's music directed by Natsumi Kameoka; Square Enix also held a random prize drawing for two signed copies of \"Chrono Trigger\" sheet music. Mitsuda expressed difficulty in selecting the tune for the orchestral medley, eventually picking a tune from each era and certain character themes. Mitsuda later wrote:\nMusic from the game was performed live by the Tokyo Symphony Orchestra in 1996 at the Orchestral Game Concert in Tokyo, Japan. A suite of music including \"Chrono Trigger\" is a part of the symphonic world-tour with video game music Play! A Video Game Symphony, where Mitsuda was in attendance for the concert's world-premiere in Chicago on May 27, 2006. His suite of \"Chrono\" music, comprising \"Reminiscence\", \"Chrono Trigger\", \"Chrono Cross~Time's Scar\", \"Frog's Theme\", and \"To Far Away Times\" was performed. Mitsuda has also appeared with the Eminence Symphony Orchestra as a special guest. Video Games Live has also featured medleys from \"Chrono Trigger\" and \"Chrono Cross\". A medley of Music from \"Chrono Trigger\" made of one of the four suites of the \"Symphonic Fantasies\" concerts in September 2009 which was produced by the creators of the Symphonic Game Music Concert series, conducted by Arnie Roth. Square Enix re-released the game's soundtrack, along with a video interview with Mitsuda in July 2009. \"Frog's Theme\" and \"Robo's Theme\" were among the video game music performed during the 2020 Summer Olympics opening ceremony. In 2022, the main theme continued to feature in the setlist of The 8-Bit Big Band, led by Charlie Rosen.\nRelease.\nThe team planned to release \"Chrono Trigger\" in late 1994, but release was pushed back to the following year. Early alpha versions of \"Chrono Trigger\" were demonstrated at the 1994 and 1995 \"V Jump\" festivals in Japan. A few months prior to the game's release, Square shipped a beta version to magazine reviewers and game stores for review. An unfinished build of the game dated November 17, 1994, it contains unused music tracks, locations, and other features changed or removed from the final release\u2014such as a dungeon named \"Singing Mountain\" and its eponymous tune. Some names also differed; the character Soysaw (Slash in the US version) was known as Wiener, while Mayonnay (Flea in the US version) was named Ketchappa. The ROM image for this early version was eventually uploaded to the internet, prompting fans to explore and document the game's differences, including two unused world map NPC character sprites and presumed additional sprites for certain non-player characters. Around the game's release, Yuji Horii commented that \"Chrono Trigger\" \"went beyond [the development team's] expectations\", and Hironobu Sakaguchi congratulated the game's graphic artists and field designers. Sakaguchi intended to perfect the \"sense of dancing you get from exploring Toriyama's worlds\" in the event that they would make a sequel.\n\"Chrono Trigger\" used a 32-megabit ROM cartridge with battery-backed RAM for saved games, lacking special on-cartridge coprocessors. The Japanese release of \"Chrono Trigger\" included art for the game's ending and running counts of items in the player's status menu. Developers created the North American version before adding these features to the original build, inadvertently leaving in vestiges of \"Chrono Trigger\" early development (such as the piece \"Singing Mountain\"). Hironobu Sakaguchi asked translator Ted Woolsey to localize \"Chrono Trigger\" for English audiences and gave him roughly thirty days to work. Lacking the help of a modern translation team, he memorized scenarios and looked at drafts of commercial player's guides to put dialogue in context. Woolsey later reflected that he would have preferred months, and blames his rushed schedule on the prevailing attitude in Japan that games were children's toys rather than serious works. Some of his work was cut due to space constraints, though he still considered \"Trigger\" \"one of the most satisfying games [he] ever worked on or played\". Nintendo of America censored certain dialogue, including references to breastfeeding, consumption of alcohol, and religion.\nThe original SNES edition of \"Chrono Trigger\" was released on the Wii download service Virtual Console in Japan on April 26, 2011, in the US on May 16, 2011, and in Europe on May 20, 2011. Previously in April 2008, a \"Nintendo Power\" reader poll had identified \"Chrono Trigger\" as the third-most wanted game for the Virtual Console. The game has also been ported to i-mode, the Virtual Console, the PlayStation Network, iOS, Android, and Windows.\nPlayStation.\nSquare released an enhanced port of \"Chrono Trigger\" developed by Tose in Japan for the Sony PlayStation in 1999. Square timed its release before that of \"Chrono Cross\", the 1999 sequel to \"Chrono Trigger\", to familiarize new players with the story leading up to it. This version included anime cutscenes created by original character designer Akira Toriyama's Bird Studio and animated at Toei Animation, as well as several bonus features, accessible after achieving various endings in the game. Scenarist Masato Kato attended planning meetings at Bird Studio to discuss how the ending cutscenes would illustrate subtle ties to \"Chrono Cross\". The port was released in North America in 2001\u2014along with a newly translated version of \"Final Fantasy IV\"\u2014as \"Final Fantasy Chronicles\". Reviewers criticized \"Chronicles\" for its lengthy load times and an absence of new in-game features. This same iteration was also re-released as a downloadable game on the PlayStation Network on October 4, 2011, for the PlayStation 3, PlayStation Vita, and PlayStation Portable.\nNintendo DS.\nOn July 2, 2008, Square Enix announced that they were planning to bring \"Chrono Trigger\" to the Nintendo DS handheld platform. Composer Yasunori Mitsuda was pleased with the project, exclaiming \"finally!\" after receiving the news from Square Enix and maintaining, \"it's still a very deep, very high-quality game even when you play it today. I'm very interested in seeing what kids today think about it when they play it.\" Square retained Masato Kato to oversee the port, and Tose to program it. Kato explained, \"I wanted it to be based on the original Super NES release rather than the PlayStation version. I thought we should look at the additional elements from the PlayStation version, re-examine and re-work them to make it a complete edition. That's how it struck me and I told the staff so later on.\" Square Enix touted the game by displaying Akira Toriyama's original art at the 2008 Tokyo Game Show.\nThe DS re-release contains all of the bonus material from the PlayStation port, as well as other enhancements. The added features include a more accurate and revised translation by Tom Slattery, a dual-screen mode which clears the top screen of all menus, a self-completing map screen, and a default \"run\" option. It also features the option to choose between two control schemes: one mirroring the original SNES controls, and the other making use of the DS's touch screen. Masato Kato participated in development, overseeing the addition of the monster-battling Arena, two new areas, the Lost Sanctum and the Dimensional Vortex, and a new ending that further foreshadows the events of \"Chrono Cross\". One of the areas within the Vortex uses the \"Singing Mountain\" song that was featured on the original \"Chrono Trigger\" soundtrack. Additionally, one of the dungeons absent from the original game was remade within the Vortex. These new dungeons met with mixed reviews; GameSpot called them \"frustrating\" and \"repetitive\", while \"IGN\" noted that \"the extra quests in the game connect extremely well.\" It was a nominee for \"Best RPG for the Nintendo DS\" in \"IGN\"s 2008 video game awards. The Nintendo DS version of \"Chrono Trigger\" was the 22nd best-selling game of 2008 in Japan.\nMobile.\nA cellphone version was released in Japan on i-mode distribution service on August 25, 2011. An iOS version was released on December 8, 2011. This version is based on the Nintendo DS version, with graphics optimized for iOS. The game was later released for Android on October 29, 2012. An update incorporating most of the features of the Windows version\u2014including the reintroduction of the animated cutscenes, which had been absent from the initial mobile release\u2014was released on February 27, 2018, for both iOS and Android.\nWindows.\nSquare Enix released \"Chrono Trigger\" without an announcement for Windows via Steam on February 27, 2018. This version includes most content from the Nintendo DS port besides the arena mode, as well as the higher resolution graphics from the mobile device releases, support for mouse and keyboard controls, and autosave features, along with additional content such as wallpapers and music. The PC port initially received negative reception due to its inferior graphical quality, additional glitches, UI adapted for touchscreens, and failure to properly adapt the control scheme for keyboards and controllers. In response, Square Enix provided various UI updates and several other improvements including adding an original graphics option based on the game's original version, fixing glitches introduced, and adding a true 16:9 widescreen presentation for the first time, to address the aforementioned complaints. In total, five major updates were released\u2014the first on April 10, 2018, and the last on August 3, 2018\u2014all of which have substantially improved its overall reception. On March 11, 2022, a sixth major patch was released; it added ultrawide 21:9 support and other quality of life features and improvements.\nReception.\nThe game was a best-seller in Japan, where two million copies were sold in only two months. It ended the year as the second best-selling game of 1995 in Japan, below \"\". \"Chrono Trigger\" was also met with substantial success upon release in North America, and its re-release on the PlayStation as part of the \"Final Fantasy Chronicles\" package topped the NPD TRSTS PlayStation sales charts for over six weeks. By March 2003, the game's SNES and PS1 iterations had shipped copies worldwide, including 2.36 million in Japan and 290,000 abroad. The PS1 version was re-released in 2003 as part of Sony's Greatest Hits line. The original SNES version had sold 2.5 million copies by 2006. \"Chrono Trigger DS\" sold 790,000 copies worldwide, as of March 2009, including 490,000 in Japan, 240,000 in North America and 60,000 in Europe. The SNES, PS1 and DS versions shipped a combined copies worldwide by March 2009. Excluding the PC version, the game had shipped over 3.5 million copies worldwide by February 2018.\n\"Chrono Trigger\" garnered much critical praise in addition to its brisk sales. \"Famicom Ts\u016bshin\" gave \"Chrono Trigger\" first an 8 out of 10 and later a 9 out of 10 in their Reader Cross Review. \"Nintendo Power\" compared it favorably with \"Secret of Mana\", \"Final Fantasy\", and \"\", citing improved graphics, sound, story and gameplay. \"GamePro\" praised the varied gameplay, the humor, the ability to replay the game with previously built-up characters, and the graphics, which they said far exceed even those of \"Final Fantasy VI\". They commented that combat is easier and more simplistic than in most RPGs, but argued that \"Most players would choose an easier RPG of this caliber over a hundred more complicated, but less developed, fantasy role-playing adventures.\" They gave the game a perfect 5 out of 5 in all four categories: graphics, sound, control, and fun factor. \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" gave it their \"Game of the Month\" award, with their four reviewers praising the graphics, story, and music. \"Chrono Trigger\" won multiple awards from \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" 1995 video game awards, including Best Role-Playing Game, Best Music in a Cartridge-Based Game, and Best Super NES Game. \"Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine\" described \"Trigger\" as \"original and extremely captivating\", singling out its graphics, sound and story as particularly impressive. \"IGN\" commented that \"it may be filled with every imaginable console RPG clich\u00e9, but \"Chrono Trigger\" manages to stand out among the pack\" with \"a [captivating] story that doesn't take itself too serious \" and \"one of the best videogame soundtracks ever produced\". Other reviewers (such as the staff of RPGFan and RPGamer) have criticized the game's short length and relative ease compared to its peers. Peter Tieryas of Kotaku praised the character interactions, explaining how the dialogue lets the characters express the emotions they would rather hide, and the game's emphasis on character interaction leads to great emotional investment in Crono and Marle's relationship, Frog's struggles for redemption, and even Magus's eons-long fight for revenge against Lavos. Victoria Earl of \"Gamasutra\" praised the game design for balancing \"developer control with player freedom using designed mechanics and a modular approach to narrative.\"\nOverall, critics lauded \"Chrono Trigger\" for its \"fantastic yet not overly complex\" story, simple but innovative gameplay, and high replay value afforded by multiple endings. Online score aggregator GameRankings lists the original Super NES version as the 2nd highest scoring RPG and 24th highest scoring game ever reviewed. \"Next Generation\" reviewed the Super NES version of the game, rating it four stars out of five, and stated that \"it [...] easily qualifies as one of the best RPGs ever made\". In 2009, Guinness World Records listed it as the 32nd most influential video game in history. \"Nintendo Power\" listed the ending to \"Chrono Trigger\" as one of the greatest endings in Nintendo history, due to over a dozen endings that players can experience. The Virtual Console release received a perfect score of 10 out 10 on \"IGN\".\n\"Chrono Trigger\" is frequently listed among the greatest video games of all time. In 1997 \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" ranked it the 29th best console video game of all time; while noting that it was not as good as \"Final Fantasy VI\" (which ranked 9th), they gave superlative praise to its handling of time travel and its combat engine. It has placed highly on all six of multimedia website \"IGN\"s \"top 100 games of all time\" lists\u20144th in 2002, 6th in early 2005, 13th in late 2005, 2nd in 2006, 18th in 2007, and 2nd in 2008. \"Game Informer\" called it its 15th favorite game in 2001. Its staff thought that it was the best non-\"Final Fantasy\" game Square had produced at the time. \"GameSpot\" included \"Chrono Trigger\" in \"The Greatest Games of All Time\" list released in April 2006, and it also appeared as 28th on an \"All Time Top 100\" list in a poll conducted by Japanese magazine \"Famitsu\" the same year. In 2004, \"Chrono Trigger\" finished runner up to \"Final Fantasy VII\" in the inaugural GameFAQs video game battle. In 2008, readers of \"Dengeki Online\" voted it the eighth best game ever made. \"Nintendo Power\" twentieth anniversary issue named it the fifth best Super NES game. In 2009, \"Official Nintendo Magazine\" ranked the DS version of the game 31st on a list of greatest Nintendo games. In 2012, it came 32nd place on \"GamesRadar\"'s \"100 best games of all time\" list, and 1st place on its \"Best JRPGs\" list. \"GamesRadar\" named \"Chrono Trigger\" the 2nd best Super NES game of all time, behind \"Super Metroid\". In 2023, Time Extension included the game on their \"Best JRPGs of All Time\" list.\nIn contrast to the critical acclaim of \"Chrono Trigger\"'s original SNES release, the 2018 Windows port of \"Chrono Trigger\" was critically panned. Grievances noted by reviewers included tiling errors on textures, the addition of aesthetically intrusive sprite filters, an unattractive GUI carried over from the 2011 mobile release, a lack of graphic customization options, and the inability to remap controls. In describing the port, \"Forbes\" commented: \"From pretty awful graphical issues, such as tiling textures and quite a painful menu system, this port really doesn't do this classic game justice.\" \"USGamer\" characterized the Windows release as carrying \"all the markings of a project farmed out to the lowest bidder. It's a shrug in Square-Enix's mind, seemingly not worth the money or effort necessary for a half-decent port.\" In a Twitter post detailing his experiences with the Windows version, indie developer Fred Wood derisively compared the port to \"someone's first attempt at an RPG Maker game\", a comment which was republished across numerous articles addressing the poor quality of the rerelease. Square Enix released six major updates to address the complaints, thus improving its overall reception; Alex Donaldson of \"VG247\", commenting on the improvements, wrote that \"Square Enix took the criticism to heart and over the course of a string of hefty patches have slowly turned this into something that actually could be argued as the best version of \"Chrono Trigger\".\"\nLegacy.\nAdd-ons.\n\"Chrono Trigger\" inspired several related releases; the first were three games released for the Satellaview on July 31, 1995. They included \"Chrono Trigger: Jet Bike Special\", a racing video game based on a minigame from the original; \"Chrono Trigger: Character Library\", featuring profiles on characters and monsters from the game; and \"Chrono Trigger: Music Library\", a collection of music from the game's soundtrack. The contents of \"Character Library\" and \"Music Library\" were later included as extras in the PlayStation rerelease of \"Chrono Trigger\". Production I.G created a 16-minute OVA, \"Dimensional Adventure Numa Monjar\", which was shown at the Japanese \"V Jump\" festival of July 31, 1996.\nFangames.\nThere have been two notable attempts by \"Chrono Trigger\" fans to unofficially remake parts of the game for PC with a 3D graphics engine. \"Chrono Resurrection\", an attempt at remaking ten small interactive cutscenes from \"Chrono Trigger\", and \"Chrono Trigger Remake Project\", which sought to remake the entire game, were forcibly terminated by Square Enix by way of a cease and desist order. Another group of fans created a sequel via a ROM hack of \"Chrono Trigger\" called \"\"; developed from 2004 to 2009; although feature-length and virtually finished, it also was terminated through a cease &amp; desist letter days before its May 2009 release. The letter also forbade the dissemination of existing \"Chrono Trigger\" ROM hacks and documentation. After the cease and desist was issued, an incomplete version of the game was leaked in May 2009, though due to the early state of the game, playability was limited.\nThis was followed by a more complete ROM leak in January 2011, which allowed the game to be played from beginning to end.\nSequels.\nSquare released a related Satellaview game in 1996, named \"Radical Dreamers\". Having thought that \"Trigger\" ended with \"unfinished business\", scenarist Masato Kato wrote and directed the game. \"Dreamers\" functioned as a side story to \"Chrono Trigger\", resolving a loose subplot from its predecessor. A short, text-based game relying on minimal graphics and atmospheric music, the game never received an official release outside Japan\u2014though it was translated by fans to English in April 2003. Square planned to release \"Radical Dreamers\" as an easter egg in the PlayStation edition of \"Chrono Trigger\", but Kato was unhappy with his work and halted its inclusion.\nSquare released \"Chrono Cross\" for the Sony PlayStation in 1999. \"Cross\" is a sequel to \"Chrono Trigger\" featuring a new setting and cast of characters. Presenting a theme of parallel worlds, the story followed the protagonist Serge\u2014a teenage boy thrust into an alternate reality in which he died years earlier. With the help of a thief named Kid, Serge endeavors to discover the truth behind his apparent death and obtain the Frozen Flame, a mythical artifact. Regarded by writer and director Masato Kato as an effort to \"redo \"Radical Dreamers\" properly\", \"Chrono Cross\" borrowed certain themes, scenarios, characters, and settings from \"Dreamers\". Yasunori Mitsuda also adapted certain songs from \"Radical Dreamers\" while scoring \"Cross\". \"Radical Dreamers\" was consequently removed from the series' main continuity, considered an alternate dimension. \"Chrono Cross\" shipped 1.5 million copies and was widely praised by critics.\nThere are no plans for a new title, despite a statement from Hironobu Sakaguchi in 2001 that the developers of \"Chrono Cross\" wanted to make a new \"Chrono\" game. The same year, Square applied for a trademark for the names \"Chrono Break\" in the United States and \"Chrono Brake\" in Japan. However, the United States trademark was dropped in 2003. Director Takashi Tokita mentioned \"Chrono Trigger 2\" in a 2003 interview which has not been translated to English. Yuji Horii expressed no interest in returning to the Chrono franchise in 2005, while Hironobu Sakaguchi remarked in April 2007 that his creation \"Blue Dragon\" was an \"extension of [Chrono Trigger].\" During a Cubed\u00b3 interview on February 1, 2007, Square Enix's Senior Vice President Hiromichi Tanaka said that although no sequel is currently planned, some sort of sequel is still possible if the \"Chrono Cross\" developers can be reunited. Yasunori Mitsuda has expressed interest in scoring a new game, but warned that \"there are a lot of politics involved\" with the series. He stressed that Masato Kato should participate in development. The February 2008 issue of \"Game Informer\" ranked the \"Chrono\" series eighth among the \"Top Ten Sequels in Demand\", naming the games \"steadfast legacies in the Square Enix catalogue\" and asking, \"what's the damn holdup?!\" In Electronic Gaming Monthly's June 2008 \"Retro Issue\", writer Jeremy Parish cited \"Chrono\" as the franchise video game fans would be most thrilled to see a sequel to. In the first May \"Famitsu\" of 2009, \"Chrono Trigger\" placed 14th out of 50 in a vote of most-wanted sequels by the magazine's readers. At E3 2009, SE Senior Vice President Shinji Hashimoto remarked, \"If people want a sequel, they should buy more!\"\nIn July 2010, Obsidian Entertainment designer Feargus Urquhart, replying to an interview question about what franchises he would like to work on, said that \"if [he] could come across everything that [he] played\", he would choose a \"Chrono Trigger\" game. At the time, Obsidian was making \"Dungeon Siege III\" for Square Enix. Urquhart said: \"You make RPGs, we make RPGs, it would be great to see what we could do together. And they really wanted to start getting into Western RPGs. And, so it kind of all ended up fitting together.\" Yoshinori Kitase stated that he used the time travel mechanics of \"Chrono Trigger\" as a starting point for that of \"Final Fantasy XIII-2\"."}
{"id": "6615", "revid": "37401930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6615", "title": "Cornwall Wildlife Trust", "text": "The Cornwall Wildlife Trust is a charitable organisation founded in 1962 that is concerned solely with Cornwall, England, United Kingdom.\nIt deals with the conservation and preservation of Cornwall's wildlife, geology and habitats managing over 50 nature reserves covering approximately , amongst them Looe Island.\nCornwall Wildlife Trust is part of The Wildlife Trusts partnership of 46 wildlife trusts in the United Kingdom. It works in conjunction with the Isles of Scilly Wildlife Trust on some matters. Cornwall Wildlife Trust produces a thrice-yearly magazine called \"Wild Cornwall\".\nThe direction and work that the Trust currently does is guided by the Cornwall Biodiversity action plan. Living Seas and Living Landscapes are two such projects. The Trust runs ERCCIS (Environmental Records Centre for Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly), a county wide database of sightings of animals and plants, and records of geology. It also gives planning advice (CEC - Cornwall Environmental Consultants) to land developers.\nThe Trust is based at Allet near Truro in Cornwall. The headquarters and offices are adjacent to the Trust's Five Acres nature reserve. This reserve includes two ponds, as well as mixed broadleaved and conifer woodland.\nList of reserves.\n1. Armstrong Wood\n2. Baker's Pit\n3. Beales Meadows\n4. Bissoe Valley\n5. Bosvenning Common\n6. Cabilla and Redrice Woods\n7. Caer Br\u00e2n\n8. Carn Moor\n9. Ch\u00fbn Downs\n10. Churchtown Farm, near Saltash\n11. Chyverton\n12. Devichoys Wood, near Penryn\n13. Downhill Meadow\n14. River Fal\u2014River Ruan Estuary\n15. Five Acres, at the Cornwall Wildlife Trust Headquarters, Allet, near Truro\n16. Fox Corner, south of Truro\n17. Greena Moor\n18. Halbullock Moor, south of Truro \n19. Hawkes Wood\n20. Helman Tor (including Breney Common and Red Moor, near Lostwithiel \n21. Kemyel Crease\n22. Kennall Vale, at Ponsanooth, between Falmouth &amp; Redruth\n23. Lanvean Bottoms\n24. Loggan's Moor, near Hayle\n25. Loveny/Colliford Reservoir\n26. Lower Lewdon\n27. Luckett/Greenscombe Wood\n28. Maer Lake\n29. Nansmellyn Marsh\n30. North Predannack Downs\n31. Park Hoskyn - The Hayman Reserve\n32. Pendarves Wood, near Camborne\n33. Penlee Battery, near Kingsand\n34. Phillips's Point\n35. Priddacombe Downs\n36. Prideaux Wood\n37. Quoit Heathland\n38. Redlake Cottage Meadows\n39. Ropehaven Cliffs\n40. Rosenannon Downs\n41. St Erth Pits, at St. Erth\n42. St George's Island (or Looe Island), near Looe\n43. Swanvale, Falmouth\n44. Sylvia's Meadow, near Callington\n45. Tamar Estuary, near Saltash\n46. Tincombe, near Saltash\n47. Trebarwith, near Tintagel\n48. Tregonetha Downs, near Goss Moor\n49. Tresayes Quarry, near Roche\n50. Tywardreath Marsh, near Par\n51. Upton Meadow, near Bude\n52. Upton Towans, near Hayle\n53. Ventongimps Moor, near Zelah, Cornwall\n54. Marsland Valley, north of Bude\n55. Windmill Farm, on The Lizard"}
{"id": "6616", "revid": "4770293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6616", "title": "Conservatory", "text": "Conservatory may refer to:"}
{"id": "6617", "revid": "47030472", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6617", "title": "Compactification (mathematics)", "text": "In mathematics, in general topology, compactification is the process or result of making a topological space into a compact space. A compact space is a space in which every open cover of the space contains a finite subcover. The methods of compactification are various, but each is a way of controlling points from \"going off to infinity\" by in some way adding \"points at infinity\" or preventing such an \"escape\".\nAn example.\nConsider the real line with its ordinary topology. This space is not compact; in a sense, points can go off to infinity to the left or to the right. It is possible to turn the real line into a compact space by adding a single \"point at infinity\" which we will denote by \u221e. The resulting compactification is homeomorphic to a circle in the plane (which, as a closed and bounded subset of the Euclidean plane, is compact). Every sequence that ran off to infinity in the real line will then converge to \u221e in this compactification. The direction in which a number approaches infinity on the number line (either in the - direction or + direction) is still preserved on the circle; for if a number approaches towards infinity from the - direction on the number line, then the corresponding point on the circle can approach \u221e from the left for example. Then if a number approaches infinity from the + direction on the number line, then the corresponding point on the circle can approach \u221e from the right.\nIntuitively, the process can be pictured as follows: first shrink the real line to the open interval on the \"x\"-axis; then bend the ends of this interval upwards (in positive \"y\"-direction) and move them towards each other, until you get a circle with one point (the topmost one) missing. This point is our new point \u221e \"at infinity\"; adding it in completes the compact circle.\nA bit more formally: we represent a point on the unit circle by its angle, in radians, going from \u2212 to for simplicity. Identify each such point \"\u03b8\" on the circle with the corresponding point on the real line tan(\"\u03b8\"/2). This function is undefined at the point , since tan(/2) is undefined; we will identify this point with our point\u00a0\u221e.\nSince tangents and inverse tangents are both continuous, our identification function is a homeomorphism between the real line and the unit circle without \u221e. What we have constructed is called the \"Alexandroff one-point compactification\" of the real line, discussed in more generality below. It is also possible to compactify the real line by adding \"two\" points, +\u221e and \u2212\u221e; this results in the extended real line.\nDefinition.\nAn embedding of a topological space \"X\" as a dense subset of a compact space is called a compactification of \"X\". It is often useful to embed topological spaces in compact spaces, because of the special properties compact spaces have.\nEmbeddings into compact Hausdorff spaces may be of particular interest. Since every compact Hausdorff space is a Tychonoff space, and every subspace of a Tychonoff space is Tychonoff, we conclude that any space possessing a Hausdorff compactification must be a Tychonoff space. In fact, the converse is also true; being a Tychonoff space is both necessary and sufficient for possessing a Hausdorff compactification.\nThe fact that large and interesting classes of non-compact spaces do in fact have compactifications of particular sorts makes compactification a common technique in topology.\nAlexandroff one-point compactification.\nFor any noncompact topological space \"X\" the (Alexandroff) one-point compactification \u03b1\"X\" of \"X\" is obtained by adding one extra point \u221e (often called a \"point at infinity\") and defining the open sets of the new space to be the open sets of \"X\" together with the sets of the form \"G\"\u00a0\u222a\u00a0, where \"G\" is an open subset of \"X\" such that formula_1 is closed and compact. The one-point compactification of \"X\" is Hausdorff if and only if \"X\" is Hausdorff and locally compact.\nStone\u2013\u010cech compactification.\nOf particular interest are Hausdorff compactifications, i.e., compactifications in which the compact space is Hausdorff. A topological space has a Hausdorff compactification if and only if it is Tychonoff. In this case, there is a unique (up to homeomorphism) \"most general\" Hausdorff compactification, the Stone\u2013\u010cech compactification of \"X\", denoted by \"\u03b2X\"; formally, this exhibits the category of Compact Hausdorff spaces and continuous maps as a reflective subcategory of the category of Tychonoff spaces and continuous maps.\n\"Most general\" or formally \"reflective\" means that the space \"\u03b2X\" is characterized by the universal property that any continuous function from \"X\" to a compact Hausdorff space \"K\" can be extended to a continuous function from \"\u03b2X\" to \"K\" in a unique way. More explicitly, \"\u03b2X\" is a compact Hausdorff space containing \"X\" such that the induced topology on \"X\" by \"\u03b2X\" is the same as the given topology on \"X\", and for any continuous map , where \"K\" is a compact Hausdorff space, there is a unique continuous map for which \"g\" restricted to \"X\" is identically\u00a0\"f\".\nThe Stone\u2013\u010cech compactification can be constructed explicitly as follows: let \"C\" be the set of continuous functions from \"X\" to the closed interval . Then each point in \"X\" can be identified with an evaluation function on \"C\". Thus \"X\" can be identified with a subset of , the space of \"all\" functions from \"C\" to . Since the latter is compact by Tychonoff's theorem, the closure of \"X\" as a subset of that space will also be compact. This is the Stone\u2013\u010cech compactification.\nSpacetime compactification.\nWalter Benz and Isaak Yaglom have shown how stereographic projection onto a single-sheet hyperboloid can be used to provide a compactification for split complex numbers. In fact, the hyperboloid is part of a quadric in real projective four-space. The method is similar to that used to provide a base manifold for group action of the conformal group of spacetime.\nProjective space.\nReal projective space RP\"n\" is a compactification of Euclidean space R\"n\". For each possible \"direction\" in which points in R\"n\" can \"escape\", one new point at infinity is added (but each direction is identified with its opposite). The Alexandroff one-point compactification of R we constructed in the example above is in fact homeomorphic to RP1. Note however that the projective plane RP2 is \"not\" the one-point compactification of the plane R2 since more than one point is added.\nComplex projective space CP\"n\" is also a compactification of C\"n\"; the Alexandroff one-point compactification of the plane C is (homeomorphic to) the complex projective line CP1, which in turn can be identified with a sphere, the Riemann sphere.\nPassing to projective space is a common tool in algebraic geometry because the added points at infinity lead to simpler formulations of many theorems. For example, any two different lines in RP2 intersect in precisely one point, a statement that is not true in R2. More generally, B\u00e9zout's theorem, which is fundamental in intersection theory, holds in projective space but not affine space. This distinct behavior of intersections in affine space and projective space is reflected in algebraic topology in the cohomology rings \u2013 the cohomology of affine space is trivial, while the cohomology of projective space is non-trivial and reflects the key features of intersection theory (dimension and degree of a subvariety, with intersection being Poincar\u00e9 dual to the cup product).\nCompactification of moduli spaces generally require allowing certain degeneracies \u2013 for example, allowing certain singularities or reducible varieties. This is notably used in the Deligne\u2013Mumford compactification of the moduli space of algebraic curves.\nCompactification and discrete subgroups of Lie groups.\nIn the study of discrete subgroups of Lie groups, the quotient space of cosets is often a candidate for more subtle compactification to preserve structure at a richer level than just topological.\nFor example, modular curves are compactified by the addition of single points for each cusp, making them Riemann surfaces (and so, since they are compact, algebraic curves). Here the cusps are there for a good reason: the curves parametrize a space of lattices, and those lattices can degenerate ('go off to infinity'), often in a number of ways (taking into account some auxiliary structure of \"level\"). The cusps stand in for those different 'directions to infinity'.\nThat is all for lattices in the plane. In -dimensional Euclidean space the same questions can be posed, for example about formula_2 This is harder to compactify. There are a variety of compactifications, such as the Borel\u2013Serre compactification, the reductive Borel\u2013Serre compactification, and the Satake compactifications, that can be formed."}
{"id": "6620", "revid": "40524816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6620", "title": "Cotangent space", "text": "In differential geometry, the cotangent space is a vector space associated with a point formula_1 on a smooth (or differentiable) manifold formula_2; one can define a cotangent space for every point on a smooth manifold. Typically, the cotangent space, formula_3 is defined as the dual space of the tangent space at \"formula_1\", formula_5, although there are more direct definitions (see below). The elements of the cotangent space are called cotangent vectors or tangent covectors.\nProperties.\nAll cotangent spaces at points on a connected manifold have the same dimension, equal to the dimension of the manifold. All the cotangent spaces of a manifold can be \"glued together\" (i.e. unioned and endowed with a topology) to form a new differentiable manifold of twice the dimension, the cotangent bundle of the manifold.\nThe tangent space and the cotangent space at a point are both real vector spaces of the same dimension and therefore isomorphic to each other via many possible isomorphisms. The introduction of a Riemannian metric or a symplectic form gives rise to a natural isomorphism between the tangent space and the cotangent space at a point, associating to any tangent covector a canonical tangent vector.\nFormal definitions.\nDefinition as linear functionals.\nLet formula_2 be a smooth manifold and let formula_1 be a point in formula_2. Let formula_5 be the tangent space at formula_1. Then the cotangent space at \"x\" is defined as the dual space of \nConcretely, elements of the cotangent space are linear functionals on formula_5. That is, every element formula_13 is a linear map\nwhere formula_15 is the underlying field of the vector space being considered, for example, the field of real numbers. The elements of formula_3 are called cotangent vectors.\nAlternative definition.\nIn some cases, one might like to have a direct definition of the cotangent space without reference to the tangent space. Such a definition can be formulated in terms of equivalence classes of smooth functions on formula_2. Informally, we will say that two smooth functions \"f\" and \"g\" are equivalent at a point formula_1 if they have the same first-order behavior near formula_1, analogous to their linear Taylor polynomials; two functions \"f\" and \"g\" have the same first order behavior near formula_1 if and only if the derivative of the function \"f\" \u2212 \"g\" vanishes at formula_1. The cotangent space will then consist of all the possible first-order behaviors of a function near formula_1.\nLet formula_2 be a smooth manifold and let \"x\" be a point in formula_2. Let formula_25be the ideal of all functions in formula_26 vanishing at formula_1, and let formula_28 be the set of functions of the form formula_29, where formula_30. Then formula_25 and formula_28 are both real vector spaces and the cotangent space can be defined as the quotient space formula_33 by showing that the two spaces are isomorphic to each other.\nThis formulation is analogous to the construction of the cotangent space to define the Zariski tangent space in algebraic geometry. The construction also generalizes to locally ringed spaces.\nThe differential of a function.\nLet formula_34 be a smooth manifold and let formula_35 be a smooth function. The differential of formula_36 at a point formula_1 is the map\nwhere formula_39 is a tangent vector at formula_1, thought of as a derivation. That is formula_41 is the Lie derivative of formula_36 in the direction formula_43, and one has formula_44. Equivalently, we can think of tangent vectors as tangents to curves, and write\nIn either case, formula_46 is a linear map on formula_47 and hence it is a tangent covector at formula_1.\nWe can then define the differential map formula_49 at a point formula_1 as the map which sends formula_36 to formula_46. Properties of the differential map include:\nThe differential map provides the link between the two alternate definitions of the cotangent space given above. Since for all formula_58 there exist formula_59 such that formula_60, we have, formula_61formula_62formula_63formula_64 i.e. All function in formula_65 have differential zero, it follows that for every two functions formula_66, formula_67, we have formula_68. We can now construct an isomorphism between formula_3 and formula_70 by sending linear maps formula_71 to the corresponding cosets formula_72. Since there is a unique linear map for a given kernel and slope, this is an isomorphism, establishing the equivalence of the two definitions.\nThe pullback of a smooth map.\nJust as every differentiable map formula_73 between manifolds induces a linear map (called the \"pushforward\" or \"derivative\") between the tangent spaces\nevery such map induces a linear map (called the \"pullback\") between the cotangent spaces, only this time in the reverse direction:\nThe pullback is naturally defined as the dual (or transpose) of the pushforward. Unraveling the definition, this means the following:\nwhere formula_77 and formula_78. Note carefully where everything lives.\nIf we define tangent covectors in terms of equivalence classes of smooth maps vanishing at a point then the definition of the pullback is even more straightforward. Let formula_79 be a smooth function on formula_80 vanishing at formula_81. Then the pullback of the covector determined by formula_79 (denoted formula_83) is given by\nThat is, it is the equivalence class of functions on formula_34 vanishing at formula_1 determined by formula_87.\nExterior powers.\nThe formula_88-th exterior power of the cotangent space, denoted formula_89, is another important object in differential and algebraic geometry. Vectors in the formula_88-th exterior power, or more precisely sections of the formula_88-th exterior power of the cotangent bundle, are called differential formula_88-forms. They can be thought of as alternating, multilinear maps on formula_88 tangent vectors. \nFor this reason, tangent covectors are frequently called \"one-forms\"."}
{"id": "6621", "revid": "374244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6621", "title": "Cnidaria", "text": "Cnidaria ( ) is a phylum under kingdom Animalia containing over 11,000 species of aquatic invertebrates found both in fresh water and marine environments (predominantly the latter), including jellyfish, hydroids, sea anemones, corals and some of the smallest marine parasites. Their distinguishing features are an uncentralized nervous system distributed throughout a gelatinous body and the presence of cnidocytes or cnidoblasts, specialized cells with ejectable flagella used mainly for envenomation and capturing prey. Their bodies consist of mesoglea, a non-living, jelly-like substance, sandwiched between two layers of epithelium that are mostly one cell thick. Cnidarians are also some of the few animals that can reproduce both sexually and asexually.\nCnidarians mostly have two basic body forms: swimming medusae and sessile polyps, both of which are radially symmetrical with mouths surrounded by tentacles that bear cnidocytes, which are specialized stinging cells used to capture prey. Both forms have a single orifice and body cavity that are used for digestion and respiration. Many cnidarian species produce colonies that are single organisms composed of medusa-like or polyp-like zooids, or both (hence they are trimorphic). Cnidarians' activities are coordinated by a decentralized nerve net and simple receptors. Cnidarians also have rhopalia, which are involved in gravity sensing and sometimes chemoreception. Several free-swimming species of Cubozoa and Scyphozoa possess balance-sensing statocysts, and some have simple eyes. Not all cnidarians reproduce sexually, but many species have complex life cycles of asexual polyp stages and sexual medusae stages. Some, however, omit either the polyp or the medusa stage, and the parasitic classes evolved to have neither form.\nCnidarians were formerly grouped with ctenophores, also known as comb jellies, in the phylum Coelenterata, but increasing awareness of their differences caused them to be placed in separate phyla. Cnidarians are classified into four main groups: the almost wholly sessile Anthozoa (sea anemones, corals, sea pens); swimming Scyphozoa (jellyfish); Cubozoa (box jellies); and Hydrozoa (a diverse group that includes all the freshwater cnidarians as well as many marine forms, and which has both sessile members, such as \"Hydra\", and colonial swimmers (such as the Portuguese man o' war)). Staurozoa have recently been recognised as a class in their own right rather than a sub-group of Scyphozoa, and the highly derived parasitic Myxozoa and Polypodiozoa were firmly recognized as cnidarians only in 2007.\nMost cnidarians prey on organisms ranging in size from plankton to animals several times larger than themselves, but many obtain much of their nutrition from symbiotic dinoflagellates, and a few are parasites. Many are preyed on by other animals including starfish, sea slugs, fish, turtles, and even other cnidarians. Many scleractinian corals\u2014which form the structural foundation for coral reefs\u2014possess polyps that are filled with symbiotic photo-synthetic zooxanthellae. While reef-forming corals are almost entirely restricted to warm and shallow marine waters, other cnidarians can be found at great depths, in polar regions, and in freshwater.\nCnidarians are a very ancient phylum, with fossils having been found in rocks formed about during the Ediacaran period, preceding the Cambrian Explosion. Other fossils show that corals may have been present shortly before and diversified a few million years later. Molecular clock analysis of mitochondrial genes suggests an even older age for the crown group of cnidarians, estimated around , almost 200 million years before the Cambrian period, as well as before any fossils. Recent phylogenetic analyses support monophyly of cnidarians, as well as the position of cnidarians as the sister group of bilaterians.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"cnidaria\" derives from the Ancient Greek word \"kn\u00edd\u0113\" (\u03ba\u03bd\u03af\u03b4\u03b7 \u201cnettle\u201d), signifying the coiled thread reminiscent of cnidocytes. The word was first coined in 1766 by the Swedish naturalist Peter Simon Pallas.\nDistinguishing features.\nCnidarians form a phylum of animals that are more complex than sponges, about as complex as ctenophores (comb jellies), and less complex than bilaterians, which include almost all other animals. Both cnidarians and ctenophores are more complex than sponges as they have: cells bound by inter-cell connections and carpet-like basement membranes; muscles; nervous systems; and some have sensory organs. Cnidarians are distinguished from all other animals by having cnidocytes that fire harpoon-like structures that are mainly used to capture prey. In some species, cnidocytes can also be used as anchors. Cnidarians are also distinguished by the fact that they have only one opening in their body for ingestion and excretion i.e. they do not have a separate mouth and anus.\nLike sponges and ctenophores, cnidarians have two main layers of cells that sandwich a middle layer of jelly-like material, which is called the mesoglea in cnidarians; more complex animals have three main cell layers and no intermediate jelly-like layer. Hence, cnidarians and ctenophores have traditionally been labelled diploblastic, along with sponges. However, both cnidarians and ctenophores have a type of muscle that, in more complex animals, arises from the middle cell layer. As a result, some recent text books classify ctenophores as triploblastic, and it has been suggested that cnidarians evolved from triploblastic ancestors.\nDescription.\nBasic body forms.\nMost adult cnidarians appear as either free-swimming medusae or sessile polyps, and many hydrozoans species are known to alternate between the two forms.\nBoth are radially symmetrical, like a wheel and a tube respectively. Since these animals have no heads, their ends are described as \"oral\" (nearest the mouth) and \"aboral\" (furthest from the mouth).\nMost have fringes of tentacles equipped with cnidocytes around their edges, and medusae generally have an inner ring of tentacles around the mouth. Some hydroids may consist of colonies of zooids that serve different purposes, such as defence, reproduction and catching prey. The mesoglea of polyps is usually thin and often soft, but that of medusae is usually thick and springy, so that it returns to its original shape after muscles around the edge have contracted to squeeze water out, enabling medusae to swim by a sort of jet propulsion.\nSkeletons.\nIn medusae, the only supporting structure is the mesoglea. \"Hydra\" and most sea anemones close their mouths when they are not feeding, and the water in the digestive cavity then acts as a hydrostatic skeleton, rather like a water-filled balloon. Other polyps such as \"Tubularia\" use columns of water-filled cells for support. Sea pens stiffen the mesoglea with calcium carbonate spicules and tough fibrous proteins, rather like sponges.\nIn some colonial polyps, a chitinous epidermis gives support and some protection to the connecting sections and to the lower parts of individual polyps. A few polyps collect materials such as sand grains and shell fragments, which they attach to their outsides. Some colonial sea anemones stiffen the mesoglea with sediment particles.\nA mineralized exoskeleton made of calcium carbonate is found in subphylum Anthozoa in the order Scleractinia (stony corals; class Hexacorallia) and the class Octocorallia, and in subphylum Medusozoa in three hydrozoan families in order Anthoathecata; Milleporidae, Stylasteridae and Hydractiniidae (the latter with a mix of calcified and uncalcified species).\nMain cell layers.\nCnidaria are diploblastic animals; in other words, they have two main cell layers, while more complex animals are triploblasts having three main layers. The two main cell layers of cnidarians form epithelia that are mostly one cell thick, and are attached to a fibrous basement membrane, which they secrete. They also secrete the jelly-like mesoglea that separates the layers. The layer that faces outwards, known as the ectoderm (\"outside skin\"), generally contains the following types of cells:\nIn addition to epitheliomuscular, nerve and interstitial cells, the inward-facing gastroderm (\"stomach skin\") contains gland cells that secrete digestive enzymes. In some species it also contains low concentrations of cnidocytes, which are used to subdue prey that is still struggling.\nThe mesoglea contains small numbers of amoeba-like cells, and muscle cells in some species. However, the number of middle-layer cells and types are much lower than in sponges.\nPolymorphism.\nPolymorphism refers to the occurrence of structurally and functionally more than two different types of individuals within the same organism. It is a characteristic feature of cnidarians, particularly the polyp and medusa forms, or of zooids within colonial organisms like those in Hydrozoa. In Hydrozoans, colonial individuals arising from individual zooids will take on separate tasks. For example, in \"Obelia\" there are feeding individuals, the gastrozooids; the individuals capable of asexual reproduction only, the gonozooids, blastostyles and free-living or sexually reproducing individuals, the medusae.\nCnidocytes.\nThese \"nettle cells\" function as harpoons, since their s remain connected to the bodies of the cells by threads. Three types of cnidocytes are known:\nThe main components of a cnidocyte are:\nIt is difficult to study the firing mechanisms of cnidocytes as these structures are small but very complex. At least four hypotheses have been proposed:\nCnidocytes can only fire once, and about 25% of a hydra's nematocysts are lost from its tentacles when capturing a brine shrimp. Used cnidocytes have to be replaced, which takes about 48\u00a0hours. To minimise wasteful firing, two types of stimulus are generally required to trigger cnidocytes: nearby sensory cells detect chemicals in the water, and their cilia respond to contact. This combination prevents them from firing at distant or non-living objects. Groups of cnidocytes are usually connected by nerves and, if one fires, the rest of the group requires a weaker minimum stimulus than the cells that fire first.\nLocomotion.\nMedusae swim by a form of jet propulsion: muscles, especially inside the rim of the bell, squeeze water out of the cavity inside the bell, and the springiness of the mesoglea powers the recovery stroke. Since the tissue layers are very thin, they provide too little power to swim against currents and just enough to control movement within currents.\nHydras and some sea anemones can move slowly over rocks and sea or stream beds by various means: creeping like snails, crawling like inchworms, or by somersaulting. A few can swim clumsily by waggling their bases.\nNervous system and senses.\nCnidarians are generally thought to have no brains or even central nervous systems. However, they do have integrative areas of neural tissue that could be considered some form of centralization. Most of their bodies are innervated by decentralized nerve nets that control their swimming musculature and connect with sensory structures, though each clade has slightly different structures. These sensory structures, usually called rhopalia, can generate signals in response to various types of stimuli such as light, pressure, chemical changes, and much more. Medusa usually have several of them around the margin of the bell that work together to control the motor nerve net, that directly innervates the swimming muscles. Most cnidarians also have a parallel system. In scyphozoans, this takes the form of a diffuse nerve net, which has modulatory effects on the nervous system. As well as forming the \"signal cables\" between sensory neurons and motoneurons, intermediate neurons in the nerve net can also form ganglia that act as local coordination centers. Communication between nerve cells can occur by chemical synapses or gap junctions in hydrozoans, though gap junctions are not present in all groups. Cnidarians have many of the same neurotransmitters as bilaterians, including chemicals such as glutamate, GABA, and glycine. Serotonin, dopamine, noradrenaline, octopamine, histamine, and acetylcholine, on the other hand, are absent.\nThis structure ensures that the musculature is excited rapidly and simultaneously, and can be directly stimulated from any point on the body, and it also is better able to recover after injury.\nMedusae and complex swimming colonies such as siphonophores and chondrophores sense tilt and acceleration by means of statocysts, chambers lined with hairs which detect the movements of internal mineral grains called statoliths. If the body tilts in the wrong direction, the animal rights itself by increasing the strength of the swimming movements on the side that is too low. Most species have ocelli (\"simple eyes\"), which can detect sources of light. However, the agile box jellyfish are unique among Medusae because they possess four kinds of true eyes that have retinas, corneas and lenses. Although the eyes probably do not form images, Cubozoa can clearly distinguish the direction from which light is coming as well as negotiate around solid-colored objects.\nFeeding and excretion.\nCnidarians feed in several ways: predation, absorbing dissolved organic chemicals, filtering food particles out of the water, obtaining nutrients from symbiotic algae within their cells, and parasitism. Most obtain the majority of their food from predation but some, including the corals \"Hetroxenia\" and \"Leptogorgia\", depend almost completely on their endosymbionts and on absorbing dissolved nutrients. Cnidaria give their symbiotic algae carbon dioxide, some nutrients, and protection against predators.\nPredatory species use their cnidocytes to poison or entangle prey, and those with venomous nematocysts may start digestion by injecting digestive enzymes. The \"smell\" of fluids from wounded prey makes the tentacles fold inwards and wipe the prey off into the mouth. In medusae, the tentacles around the edge of the bell are often short and most of the prey capture is done by \"oral arms\", which are extensions of the edge of the mouth and are often frilled and sometimes branched to increase their surface area. These \"oral arms\" aid in cnidarians' ability to move prey towards their mouth once it has been poisoned and entangled. Medusae often trap prey or suspended food particles by swimming upwards, spreading their tentacles and oral arms and then sinking. In species for which suspended food particles are important, the tentacles and oral arms often have rows of cilia whose beating creates currents that flow towards the mouth, and some produce nets of mucus to trap particles. Their digestion is both intra and extracellular.\nOnce the food is in the digestive cavity, gland cells in the gastroderm release enzymes that reduce the prey to slurry, usually within a few hours. This circulates through the digestive cavity and, in colonial cnidarians, through the connecting tunnels, so that gastroderm cells can absorb the nutrients. Absorption may take a few hours, and digestion within the cells may take a few days. The circulation of nutrients is driven by water currents produced by cilia in the gastroderm or by muscular movements or both, so that nutrients reach all parts of the digestive cavity. Nutrients reach the outer cell layer by diffusion or, for animals or zooids such as medusae which have thick mesogleas, are transported by mobile cells in the mesoglea.\nIndigestible remains of prey are expelled through the mouth. The main waste product of cells' internal processes is ammonia, which is removed by the external and internal water currents.\nRespiration.\nThere are no respiratory organs, and both cell layers absorb oxygen from and expel carbon dioxide into the surrounding water. When the water in the digestive cavity becomes stale it must be replaced, and nutrients that have not been absorbed will be expelled with it. Some Anthozoa have ciliated grooves on their tentacles, allowing them to pump water out of and into the digestive cavity without opening the mouth. This improves respiration after feeding and allows these animals, which use the cavity as a hydrostatic skeleton, to control the water pressure in the cavity without expelling undigested food.\nCnidaria that carry photosynthetic symbionts may have the opposite problem, an excess of oxygen, which may prove toxic. The animals produce large quantities of antioxidants to neutralize the excess oxygen.\nRegeneration.\nAll cnidarians can regenerate, allowing them to recover from injury and to reproduce asexually. Medusae have limited ability to regenerate, but polyps can do so from small pieces or even collections of separated cells. This enables corals to recover even after apparently being destroyed by predators.\nReproduction.\nSexual.\nCnidarian sexual reproduction often involves a complex life cycle with both polyp and medusa stages. For example, in Scyphozoa (jellyfish) and Cubozoa (box jellies), a larva swims until it finds a good site, and then becomes a polyp. This grows normally but then absorbs its tentacles and splits horizontally into a series of disks that become juvenile medusae, a process called strobilation. The juveniles swim off and slowly grow to maturity, while the polyp re-grows and may continue strobilating periodically. The adult medusae have gonads in the gastroderm, and these release ova and sperm into the water in the breeding season.\nThis phenomenon of succession of differently organized generations (one asexually reproducing, sessile polyp, followed by a free-swimming medusa or a sessile polyp that reproduces sexually) is sometimes called \"alternation of asexual and sexual phases\" or \"metagenesis\", but should not be confused with the alternation of generations as found in plants.\nShortened forms of this life cycle are common, for example some oceanic scyphozoans omit the polyp stage completely, and cubozoan polyps produce only one medusa. Hydrozoa have a variety of life cycles. Some have no polyp stages and some (e.g. \"hydra\") have no medusae. In some species, the medusae remain attached to the polyp and are responsible for sexual reproduction; in extreme cases these reproductive zooids may not look much like medusae. Meanwhile, life cycle reversal, in which polyps are formed directly from medusae without the involvement of sexual reproduction process, was observed in both Hydrozoa (\"Turritopsis dohrnii\" and \"Laodicea undulata\") and Scyphozoa (\"Aurelia\" sp.1). Anthozoa have no medusa stage at all and the polyps are responsible for sexual reproduction.\nSpawning is generally driven by environmental factors such as changes in the water temperature, and their release is triggered by lighting conditions such as sunrise, sunset or the phase of the moon. Many species of Cnidaria may spawn simultaneously in the same location, so that there are too many ova and sperm for predators to eat more than a tiny percentage\u00a0\u2014 one famous example is the Great Barrier Reef, where at least 110 corals and a few non-cnidarian invertebrates produce enough gametes to turn the water cloudy. These mass spawnings may produce hybrids, some of which can settle and form polyps, but it is not known how long these can survive. In some species the ova release chemicals that attract sperm of the same species.\nThe fertilized eggs develop into larvae by dividing until there are enough cells to form a hollow sphere (blastula) and then a depression forms at one end (gastrulation) and eventually becomes the digestive cavity. However, in cnidarians the depression forms at the end further from the yolk (at the animal pole), while in bilaterians it forms at the other end (vegetal pole). The larvae, called planulae, swim or crawl by means of cilia. They are cigar-shaped but slightly broader at the \"front\" end, which is the aboral, vegetal-pole end and eventually attaches to a substrate if the species has a polyp stage.\nAnthozoan larvae either have large yolks or are capable of feeding on plankton, and some already have endosymbiotic algae that help to feed them. Since the parents are immobile, these feeding capabilities extend the larvae's range and avoid overcrowding of sites. Scyphozoan and hydrozoan larvae have little yolk and most lack endosymbiotic algae, and therefore have to settle quickly and metamorphose into polyps. Instead, these species rely on their medusae to extend their ranges.\nAsexual.\nAll known cnidarians can reproduce asexually by various means, in addition to regenerating after being fragmented. Hydrozoan polyps only bud, while the medusae of some hydrozoans can divide down the middle. Scyphozoan polyps can both bud and split down the middle. In addition to both of these methods, Anthozoa can split horizontally just above the base. Asexual reproduction makes the daughter cnidarian a clone of the adult. The ability of cnidarians to asexually reproduce ensures a greater number of mature medusa that can mature to reproduce sexually.\nDNA repair.\nTwo classical DNA repair pathways, nucleotide excision repair and base excision repair, are present in hydra, and these repair pathways facilitate unhindered reproduction. The identification of these pathways in hydra is based, in part, on the presence in the hydra genome of genes homologous to genes in other genetically well studied species that have been demonstrated to play key roles in these DNA repair pathways.\nClassification.\nCnidarians were for a long time grouped with ctenophores in the phylum Coelenterata, but increasing awareness of their differences caused them to be placed in separate phyla. Modern cnidarians are generally classified into four main classes: sessile Anthozoa (sea anemones, corals, sea pens); swimming Scyphozoa (jellyfish) and Cubozoa (box jellies); and Hydrozoa, a diverse group that includes all the freshwater cnidarians as well as many marine forms, and has both sessile members such as \"Hydra\" and colonial swimmers such as the Portuguese Man o' War. Staurozoa have recently been recognised as a class in their own right rather than a sub-group of Scyphozoa, and the parasitic Myxozoa and Polypodiozoa are now recognized as highly derived cnidarians rather than more closely related to the bilaterians.\nStauromedusae, small sessile cnidarians with stalks and no medusa stage, have traditionally been classified as members of the Scyphozoa, but recent research suggests they should be regarded as a separate class, Staurozoa.\nThe Myxozoa, microscopic parasites, were first classified as protozoans. Research then found that \"Polypodium hydriforme\", a non-myxozoan parasite \"within\" the egg cells of sturgeon, is closely related to the Myxozoa and suggested that both \"Polypodium\" and the Myxozoa were intermediate between cnidarians and bilaterian animals. More recent research demonstrates that the previous identification of bilaterian genes reflected contamination of the myxozoan samples by material from their host organism, and they are now firmly identified as heavily derived cnidarians, and more closely related to Hydrozoa and Scyphozoa than to Anthozoa.\nSome researchers classify the extinct conulariids as cnidarians, while others propose that they form a completely separate phylum.\nCurrent classification according to the World Register of Marine Species: \nEcology.\nMany cnidarians are limited to shallow waters because they depend on endosymbiotic algae for much of their nutrients. The life cycles of most have polyp stages, which are limited to locations that offer stable substrates. Nevertheless, major cnidarian groups contain species that have escaped these limitations. Hydrozoans have a worldwide range: some, such as \"Hydra\", live in freshwater; \"Obelia\" appears in the coastal waters of all the oceans; and \"Liriope\" can form large shoals near the surface in mid-ocean. Among anthozoans, a few scleractinian corals, sea pens and sea fans live in deep, cold waters, and some sea anemones inhabit polar seabeds while others live near hydrothermal vents over below sea-level. Reef-building corals are limited to tropical seas between 30\u00b0N and 30\u00b0S with a maximum depth of , temperatures between , high salinity, and low carbon dioxide levels. Stauromedusae, although usually classified as jellyfish, are stalked, sessile animals that live in cool to Arctic waters. Cnidarians range in size from a mere handful of cells for the parasitic myxozoans through \"Hydra\"'s length of , to the lion's mane jellyfish, which may exceed in diameter and in length.\nPrey of cnidarians ranges from plankton to animals several times larger than themselves. Some cnidarians are parasites, mainly on jellyfish but a few are major pests of fish. Others obtain most of their nourishment from endosymbiotic algae or dissolved nutrients. Predators of cnidarians include: sea slugs, flatworms and comb jellies, which can incorporate nematocysts into their own bodies for self-defense (nematocysts used by cnidarian predators are referred to as kleptocnidae); starfish, notably the crown of thorns starfish, which can devastate corals; butterfly fish and parrot fish, which eat corals; and marine turtles, which eat jellyfish. Some sea anemones and jellyfish have a symbiotic relationship with some fish; for example clownfish live among the tentacles of sea anemones, and each partner protects the other against predators.\nCoral reefs form some of the world's most productive ecosystems. Common coral reef cnidarians include both anthozoans (hard corals, octocorals, anemones) and hydrozoans (fire corals, lace corals). The endosymbiotic algae of many cnidarian species are very effective primary producers, in other words converters of inorganic chemicals into organic ones that other organisms can use, and their coral hosts use these organic chemicals very efficiently. In addition, reefs provide complex and varied habitats that support a wide range of other organisms. Fringing reefs just below low-tide level also have a mutually beneficial relationship with mangrove forests at high-tide level and seagrass meadows in between: the reefs protect the mangroves and seagrass from strong currents and waves that would damage them or erode the sediments in which they are rooted, while the mangroves and seagrass protect the coral from large influxes of silt, fresh water and pollutants. This additional level of variety in the environment is beneficial to many types of coral reef animals, which for example may feed in the sea grass and use the reefs for protection or breeding.\nEvolutionary history.\nFossil record.\nThe earliest widely accepted animal fossils are rather modern-looking cnidarians, possibly from around , although fossils from the Doushantuo Formation can only be dated approximately. The identification of some of these as embryos of animals has been contested, but other fossils from these rocks strongly resemble tubes and other mineralized structures made by corals. Their presence implies that the cnidarian and bilaterian lineages had already diverged. Although the Ediacaran fossil \"Charnia\" used to be classified as a jellyfish or sea pen, more recent study of growth patterns in \"Charnia\" and modern cnidarians has cast doubt on this hypothesis, leaving the Canadian polyp \"Haootia\" and the British \"Auroralumina\" as the only recognized cnidarian body fossils from the Ediacaran. \"Auroralumina\" is the earliest known animal predator. Few fossils of cnidarians without mineralized skeletons are known from more recent rocks, except in Lagerst\u00e4tten that preserved soft-bodied animals.\nA few mineralized fossils that resemble corals have been found in rocks from the Cambrian period, and corals diversified in the Early Ordovician. These corals, which were wiped out in the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event about , did not dominate reef construction since sponges and algae also played a major part. During the Mesozoic era, rudist bivalves were the main reef-builders, but they were wiped out in the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event , and since then the main reef-builders have been scleractinian corals.\nPhylogeny.\nIt is difficult to reconstruct the early stages in the evolutionary \"family tree\" of animals using only morphology (their shapes and structures), because the large differences between Porifera (sponges), Cnidaria plus Ctenophora (comb jellies), Placozoa and Bilateria (all the more complex animals) make comparisons difficult. Hence reconstructions now rely largely or entirely on molecular phylogenetics, which groups organisms according to similarities and differences in their biochemistry, usually in their DNA or RNA.\nIt is now generally thought that the Calcarea (sponges with calcium carbonate spicules) are more closely related to Cnidaria, Ctenophora (comb jellies) and Bilateria (all the more complex animals) than they are to the other groups of sponges. In 1866, it was proposed that Cnidaria and Ctenophora were more closely related to each other than to Bilateria and formed a group called Coelenterata (\"hollow guts\"), because Cnidaria and Ctenophora both rely on the flow of water in and out of a single cavity for feeding, excretion and respiration. In 1881, it was proposed that Ctenophora and Bilateria were more closely related to each other, since they shared features that Cnidaria lack, for example muscles in the middle layer (mesoglea in Ctenophora, mesoderm in Bilateria). However, more recent analyses indicate that these similarities are rather vague, and the current view, based on molecular phylogenetics, is that Cnidaria and Bilateria are more closely related to each other than either is to Ctenophora. This grouping of Cnidaria and Bilateria has been labelled \"Planulozoa\" because it suggests that the earliest Bilateria were similar to the planula larvae of Cnidaria.\nHowever, in 2005, Katja Seipel and Volker Schmid suggested that cnidarians and ctenophores are simplified descendants of triploblastic animals, since ctenophores and the medusa stage of some cnidarians have striated muscle, which in bilaterians arises from the mesoderm. They did not commit themselves on whether bilaterians evolved from early cnidarians or from the hypothesized triploblastic ancestors of cnidarians.\nResolving the evolutionary relationships within Cnidaria has been equally challenging, with almost every possible combination of clades being proposed. As time went on though, a semi-consensus has started to emerge. The enigmatic \"Polypodium hydriforme\" and subphylum Myxozoa have been firmly placed within the Cnidaria and have been shown to be closely related to the Medusozoa. In addition, these two groups have been found to likely be each others closest relatives which, if true, would form the clade \"Endocnidozoa\". The relationships within the Medusozoa are currently probably the most contentious part of the tree. Traditionally, the class Scyphozoa also included Staurozoa and Cubozoa, but significant morphological differences eventually lead to the split of the three. The group containing them has since been named \"Acraspeda\". The relationships between these three and Hydrozoa have since and still are debated. A relationship between Scyphozoa and Cubozoa with Staurozoa as its sister has seen support in nearly all studies, but the position of the remaining class, Hydrozoa, is not understood. Several studies have found that Acraspeda is paraphyletic, with Hydrozoa being more closely related to Scyphozoa than to the other classes. At the same time, other studies have recovered Acraspeda as being monophyletic. The subphylum Anthozoa is argued to have either two or three classes, but the relationships between them is not disputed; the tube-dwelling anemones of the class Ceriantharia have consistently shown to be more closely related to the Hexacorallia than to the Octocorallia.\nIn molecular phylogenetics analyses from 2005 onwards, important groups of developmental genes show the same variety in cnidarians as in chordates. In fact cnidarians, and especially anthozoans (sea anemones and corals), retain some genes that are present in bacteria, protists, plants and fungi but not in bilaterians.\nThe mitochondrial genome in the medusozoan cnidarians, unlike those in other animals, is linear with fragmented genes. The reason for this difference is unknown.\nInteraction with humans.\nJellyfish stings killed about 1,500 people in the 20th century, and cubozoans are particularly dangerous. On the other hand, some large jellyfish are considered a delicacy in East and Southeast Asia. Coral reefs have long been economically important as providers of fishing grounds, protectors of shore buildings against currents and tides, and more recently as centers of tourism. However, they are vulnerable to over-fishing, mining for construction materials, pollution, and damage caused by tourism.\nBeaches protected from tides and storms by coral reefs are often the best places for housing in tropical countries. Reefs are an important food source for low-technology fishing, both on the reefs themselves and in the adjacent seas. However, despite their great productivity, reefs are vulnerable to over-fishing, because much of the organic carbon they produce is exhaled as carbon dioxide by organisms at the middle levels of the food chain and never reaches the larger species that are of interest to fishermen. Tourism centered on reefs provides much of the income of some tropical islands, attracting photographers, divers and sports fishermen. However, human activities damage reefs in several ways: mining for construction materials; pollution, including large influxes of fresh water from storm drains; commercial fishing, including the use of dynamite to stun fish and the capture of young fish for aquariums; and tourist damage caused by boat anchors and the cumulative effect of walking on the reefs. Coral, mainly from the Pacific Ocean has long been used in jewellery, and demand rose sharply in the 1980s.\nSome large jellyfish species of the Rhizostomeae order are commonly consumed in Japan, Korea and Southeast Asia. In parts of the range, fishing industry is restricted to daylight hours and calm conditions in two short seasons, from March to May and August to November. The commercial value of jellyfish food products depends on the skill with which they are prepared, and \"Jellyfish Masters\" guard their trade secrets carefully. Jellyfish is very low in cholesterol and sugars, but cheap preparation can introduce undesirable amounts of heavy metals.\nThe \"sea wasp\" \"Chironex fleckeri\" has been described as the world's most venomous jellyfish and is held responsible for 67\u00a0deaths, although it is difficult to identify the animal as it is almost transparent. Most stingings by \"C. fleckeri\" cause only mild symptoms. Seven other box jellies can cause a set of symptoms called Irukandji syndrome, which takes about 30\u00a0minutes to develop, and from a few hours to two\u00a0weeks to disappear. Hospital treatment is usually required, and there have been a few deaths.\nA number of the parasitic myxozoans are commercially important pathogens in salmonid aquaculture. A Scyphozoa species \u2013 \"Pelagia noctiluca\" \u2013 and a Hydrozoa \u2013 \"Muggiaea atlantica\" \u2013 have caused repeated mass mortality in salmon farms over the years around Ireland. A loss valued at \u00a31 million struck in November 2007, 20,000 died off Clare Island in 2013 and four fish farms collectively lost tens of thousands of salmon in September 2017."}
{"id": "6622", "revid": "23657", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6622", "title": "Coelenterates", "text": ""}
{"id": "6623", "revid": "892079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6623", "title": "Conservative Judaism", "text": "Conservative Judaism, also known as Masorti Judaism, is a Jewish religious movement that regards the authority of Jewish law and tradition as emanating primarily from the assent of the people through the generations, more than from divine revelation. It therefore views Jewish law, or \"Halakha\", as both binding and subject to historical development. The Conservative rabbinate employs modern historical-critical research, rather than only traditional methods and sources, and lends great weight to its constituency, when determining its stance on matters of practice. The movement considers its approach as the authentic and most appropriate continuation of \"Halakhic\" discourse, maintaining both fealty to received forms and flexibility in their interpretation. It also eschews strict theological definitions, lacking a consensus in matters of faith and allowing great pluralism.\nWhile regarding itself as the heir of Rabbi Zecharias Frankel's 19th-century positive-historical school in Europe, Conservative Judaism fully institutionalized only in the United States during the mid-20th century. Its largest center is in North America, where its main congregational arm is the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism, and the New York\u2013based Jewish Theological Seminary of America operates as its largest rabbinic seminary. Globally, affiliated communities are united within the umbrella organization Masorti Olami. Conservative Judaism is the third-largest Jewish religious movement worldwide, estimated to represent close to 1.1 million people, including over 600,000 registered adult congregants and many non-member identifiers.\nTheology.\nAttitude.\nConservative Judaism, from its earliest stages, was marked by ambivalence and ambiguity in all matters theological. Rabbi Zecharias Frankel, considered its intellectual progenitor, believed the very notion of theology was alien to traditional Judaism. He was often accused of obscurity on the subject by his opponents, both Reform and Orthodox. The American movement largely espoused a similar approach, and its leaders mostly avoided the field. Only in 1985 did a course about Conservative theology open in the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (JTS). The hitherto sole major attempt to define a clear credo was made in 1988, with the Statement of Principles \"Emet ve-Emunah\" (Truth and Belief), formulated and issued by the Leadership Council of Conservative Judaism. The introduction stated that \"lack of definition was useful\" in the past but a need to articulate one now arose. The platform provided many statements citing key concepts such as God, revelation and Election, but also acknowledged that a variety of positions and convictions existed within its ranks, eschewing strict delineation of principles and often expressing conflicting views. In a 1999 special edition of \"Conservative Judaism\" dedicated to the matter, leading rabbis Elliot N. Dorff and Gordon Tucker stated that \"the great diversity\" within the movement \"makes the creation of a theological vision shared by all neither possible nor desirable\".\nGod and eschatology.\nConservative Judaism largely upholds the theistic notion of a personal God. \"Emet ve-Emunah\" stated that \"we affirm our faith in God as the Creator and Governor of the universe. His power called the world into being; His wisdom and goodness guide its destiny.\"\nConcurrently, the platform also noted that His nature was \"elusive\" and subject to many options of belief. A naturalistic conception of divinity, regarding it as inseparable from the mundane world, once had an important place within the movement, especially represented by Mordecai Kaplan. After Kaplan's Reconstructionism fully coalesced into an independent movement, these views were marginalized.\nA similarly inconclusive position is expressed toward other precepts. Most theologians adhere to the Immortality of the Soul, but while references to the Resurrection of the Dead are maintained, English translations of the prayers obscure the issue. In \"Emet\", it was stated that death is not tantamount to the end of one's personality. Relating to the Messianic ideal, the movement rephrased most petitions for the restoration of the Sacrifices into past tense, rejecting a renewal of animal offerings, though not opposing a Return to Zion and even a New Temple. The 1988 platform announced that \"some\" believe in classic eschatology, but dogmatism in this matter was \"philosophically unjustified\". The notions of Election of Israel and God's covenant with it were basically retained as well.\nRevelation.\nConservative conception of Revelation encompasses an extensive spectrum. Zecharias Frankel himself applied critical-scientific methods to analyze the stages in the development of the Oral Torah, pioneering modern study of the Mishnah. He regarded the Beatified Sages as innovators who added their own, original contribution to the canon, not merely as expounders and interpreters of a legal system given in its entirety to Moses on Mount Sinai. Yet he also vehemently rejected utilizing these disciplines on the Pentateuch, maintaining it was beyond human reach and wholly celestial in origin. Frankel never elucidated his beliefs, and the exact correlation between human and divine in his thought is still subject to scholarly debate. A similar negative approach toward Higher Criticism, while accepting an evolutionary understanding of Oral Law, defined Rabbi Alexander Kohut, Solomon Schechter and the early generation of American Conservative Judaism. When JTS faculty began to embrace Biblical criticism in the 1920s, they adapted a theological view consistent with it: an original, verbal revelation did occur at Sinai, but the text itself was composed by later authors. The latter, classified by Dorff as a relatively moderate metamorphosis of the old one, is still espoused by few traditionalist right-wing Conservative rabbis, though it is marginalized among senior leadership.\nA small but influential segment within the JTS and the movement adhered, from the 1930s, to Mordecai Kaplan's philosophy that denied any form of revelation but viewed all scripture as a purely human product. Along with other Reconstructionist tenets, it dwindled as the latter consolidated into a separate group. Kaplan's views and the permeation of Higher Criticism gradually swayed most Conservative thinkers towards a non-verbal understanding of theophany, which has become dominant in the 1970s. This was in sync with the wider trend of lowering rates of Americans who accepted the Bible as the Word of God. Dorff categorized the proponents of this into two schools. One maintains that God projected some form of message which inspired the human authors of the Pentateuch to record what they perceived. The other is often strongly influenced by Franz Rosenzweig and other existentialists, but also attracted many Objectivists who consider human reason paramount. The second school states that God conferred merely his presence on those he influenced, without any communication, and the experience drove them to spiritual creativity. While they differ in the theoretical level surrounding revelation, both practically regard all scripture and religious tradition as a human product with certain divine inspiration\u2014providing an understanding that recognizes Biblical Criticism and also justifies major innovation in religious conduct. The first doctrine, advocated by such leaders as rabbis Ben-Zion Bokser and Robert Gordis, largely imparted that some elements within Judaism are fully divine but determining which would be impractical, and therefore received forms of interpretation should be basically upheld. Exponents of the latter view, among them rabbis Louis Jacobs and Neil Gillman, also emphasized the encounter of God with the Jews as a collective and the role of religious authorities through the generations in determining what it implied. The stress on the supremacy of community and tradition, rather than individual consciousness, defines the entire spectrum of Conservative thought.\nIdeology.\nThe Conservative mainstay was the adoption of the historical-critical method in understanding Judaism and setting its future course. In accepting an evolutionary approach to the religion, as something that developed over time and absorbed considerable external influences, the movement distinguished between the original meaning implied in traditional sources and the manner they were grasped by successive generations, rejecting belief in an unbroken chain of interpretation from God's original Revelation, immune to any major extraneous effects. This evolutionary perception of religion, while relatively moderate in comparison with more radical modernizers\u2014the scholarship of the Positive-Historical school, for example, sought to demonstrate the continuity and cohesiveness of Judaism over the years\u2014still challenged Conservative leaders.\nThey regarded tradition and received mores with reverence, especially the continued adherence to the mechanism of Religious Law (\"Halakha\"), opposing indiscriminate modification, and emphasized they should be changed only with care and caution and remain observed by the people. Rabbi Louis Ginzberg, summarizing his movement's position, wrote:\nThis discrepancy between scientific criticism and insistence on heritage had to be compensated by a conviction that would forestall either deviation from accepted norms or laxity and apathy.\nA key doctrine which was to fulfil this capacity was the collective will of the Jewish people. Conservatives lent great weight in determining religious practice, both in historical precedent and as a means to shape present conduct. Zecharias Frankel pioneered this approach; as Michael A. Meyer commented, \"the extraordinary status which he ascribed to the ingrained beliefs and practices of the community is probably the most original element of his thought.\" He turned it into a source of legitimacy for both change and preservation, but mostly the latter. The basic moderation and traditionalism of the majority among the people were to guarantee a sense of continuity and unity, restraining the guiding rabbis and scholars who at his age were intent on reform but also allowing them manoeuvrability in adopting or discarding certain elements. Solomon Schechter espoused a similar position. He turned the old rabbinic concept of \"K'lal Yisrael\", which he translated as \"Catholic Israel\", into a comprehensive worldview. For him, the details of divine Revelation were of secondary significance, as historical change dictated its interpretation through the ages notwithstanding: \"The centre of authority is actually removed from the Bible\", he surmised, \"and placed in some living body... in touch with the ideal aspirations and the religious needs of the age, best able to determine... This living body, however, is not represented by... Priesthood, or Rabbihood, but by the collective conscience of Catholic Israel.\"\nThe scope, limits and role of this corpus were a matter for contention in Conservative ranks. Schechter himself used it to oppose any major break with either traditionalist or progressive elements within American Jewry of his day, while some of his successors argued that the idea became obsolete due to the great alienation of many from received forms, that had to be countered by innovative measures to draw them back. The Conservative rabbinate often vacillated on to which degree may the non-practicing, religiously apathetic strata be included as a factor within Catholic Israel, providing impulse for them in determining religious questions; even avant-garde leaders acquiesced that the majority could not serve that function. Right-wing critics often charged that the movement allowed its uncommitted laity an exaggerated role, conceding to its demands and successively stretching \"halakhic\" boundaries beyond any limit.\nThe Conservative leadership had limited success in imparting their worldview to the general public. While the rabbinate perceived itself as bearing a unique, original conception of Judaism, the masses lacked much interest, regarding it mainly as a compromise offering a channel for religious identification that was more traditional than Reform Judaism yet less strict than Orthodoxy. Only a low percentage of Conservative congregants actively pursue an observant lifestyle: in the mid-1980s, Charles Liebman and Daniel J. Elazar calculated that barely 3 to 4 per cent held to one quite thoroughly. This gap between principle and the public, more pronounced than in any other Jewish movement, is often credited at explaining the decline of the Conservative movement. While some 41 per cent of American Jews identified with it in the 1970s, it had shrunk to an estimated 18 per cent (and 11 per cent among those under 30) in 2013.\nJewish law.\nRole.\nFidelity and commitment to \"Halakha\", while subject to criticism as disingenuous both from within and without, were and remain a cornerstone doctrine of Conservative Judaism. The movement views the legalistic system as normative and binding, and believes Jews must practically observe its precepts, like Sabbath, dietary ordinances, ritual purity, daily prayer with phylacteries and the like. Concurrently, examining Jewish history and rabbinic literature through the lens of academic criticism, it maintained that these laws were always subject to considerable evolution, and must continue to do so. \"Emet ve-Emunah\" titled its chapter on the subject with \"The Indispensability of Halakha\", stating that \"\"Halakha\" in its developing form is an indispensable element of a traditional Judaism which is vital and modern.\" Conservative Judaism regards itself as the authentic inheritor of a flexible legalistic tradition, charging the Orthodox with petrifying the process and Reform with abandoning it.\nThe tension between \"tradition and change\"\u2014which were also the motto adopted by the movement since the 1950s\u2014and the need to balance them were always a topic of intense debate within Conservative Judaism. In its early stages, the leadership opposed pronounced innovation, mostly adopting a relatively rigid position. Mordecai Kaplan's Reconstructionism raised the demand for thoroughgoing modification without much regard for the past or \"Halakhic\" considerations, but senior rabbis opposed him vigorously. Even in the 1940s and 1950s, when Kaplan's influence grew, his superiors rabbis Louis Ginzberg, Louis Finkelstein and Saul Lieberman espoused a very conservative line. Since the 1970s, with the strengthening of the liberal wing within the movement, the majority in the Rabbinic Assembly opted for quite radical reformulations in religious conduct, but rejected the Reconstructionist \"Non-Halakhic\" approach, insisting that the legalistic method be maintained. The \"Halakhic\" commitment of Conservative Judaism has been subject to much criticism, from within and without. Right-wing discontents, including the Union for Traditional Judaism which seceded in protest of the 1983 resolution to ordain women rabbis\u2014adopted at an open vote, where all JTS faculty regardless of qualification were counted\u2014contested the validity of this description, as well as progressives like Rabbi Neil Gillman, who exhorted the movement to cease describing itself as \"Halakhic\" in 2005, stating that after repeated concessions, \"Our original claim has died a death by a thousand qualifications... It has lost all factual meaning.\"\nThe main body entrusted with formulating rulings, responsa and statues is the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards (CJLS), a panel with 25 voting legalistic specialists and further 11 observers. There is also the smaller \"Va'ad ha-Halakha\" (Law Committee) of Israel's Masorti Movement. Every responsa must receive a minimum of six voters to be considered an official position of the CJLS. Conservative Judaism explicitly acknowledges the principle of \"halakhic\" pluralism, enabling the panel to adopt more than one resolution in any given subject. The final authority in each Conservative community is the local rabbi, the \"Mara D'Atra\" (Lord of the Locality, in traditional terms), enfranchised to adopt either minority or majority opinions from the CJLS or maintain local practice. Thus, on the issue of admitting openly homosexual rabbinic candidates, the Committee approved two resolutions, one in favour and one against; the JTS took the lenient position, while the Seminario Rabinico Latinoamericano still adheres to the latter. Likewise, while most Conservative synagogues approved of egalitarianism for women in religious life, some still maintain traditional gender roles and do not count females for prayer quorums.\nCharacteristics.\nThe Conservative treatment of \"Halakha\" is defined by several features, though the entire range of its \"Halakhic\" discourse cannot be sharply distinguished from either the Traditional or Orthodox one. Rabbi David Golinkin, who attempted to classify its parameters, stressed that quite often rulings merely reiterate conclusions reached in older sources or even Orthodox ones. For example, in the details of preparing Sabbath ritual enclosures, it draws directly on the opinions of the \"Shulchan Aruch\" and Rabbi Hayim David HaLevi. Another tendency prevalent among the movement's rabbis, yet again not particular to it, is the adoption of the more lenient positions on the matters at question\u2014though this is not universal, and responsa also took stringent ones not infrequently.\nA more distinctive characterization is a greater proclivity to base rulings on earlier sources, in the \"Rishonim\" or before them, as far back as the Talmud. Conservative decisors frequently resort to less canonical sources, isolated responsa or minority opinions. They demonstrate more fluidity in regards to established precedent and continuum in rabbinic literature, mainly those by the later authorities, and lay little stress on the perceived hierarchy between major and minor legalists of the past. They are far more inclined to contend (\"machloket\") with old rulings, to be flexible towards custom or to wholly disregard it. This is especially expressed in less hesitancy to rule against or notwithstanding the major codifications of Jewish Law, like \"Mishneh Torah\", \"Arba'ah Turim\" and especially the \"Shulchan Aruch\" with its Isserles Gloss and later commentaries. Conservative authorities, while often relying on the \"Shulchan Aruch\" themselves, criticize the Orthodox for relatively rarely venturing beyond it and overly canonizing Rabbi Joseph Karo's work. In several occasions, Conservative rabbis discerned that the \"Shulchan Aruch\" ruled without firm precedent, sometimes deriving his conclusions from the \"Kabbalah\". An important example is the ruling of Rabbi Golinkin\u2014contrary to the majority consensus among the \"Acharonim\" and the more prominent \"Rishonim\", but based on many opinions of the lesser \"Rishonim\" which is derived from a minority view in the Talmud\u2014that the Sabbatical Year is not obligatory in present times at all (neither \"de'Oraita\" nor \"de'Rabanan\") but rather an act of piety.\nEthical considerations and the weight due to them in determining \"halakhic\" issues, mainly to what degree may modern sensibilities shape the outcome, are subject to much discourse. Right-wing decisors, like Rabbi Joel Roth, maintained that such elements are naturally a factor in formulating conclusions, but may not alone serve as a justification for adopting a position. The majority, however, basically subscribed to the opinion evinced already by Rabbi Seymour Siegel in the 1960s, that the cultural and ethical norms of the community, the contemporary equivalents of Talmudic \"Aggadah\", should supersede the legalistic forms when the two came into conflict and there was a pivotal ethical concern. Rabbi Elliot Dorff concluded that in contrast to the Orthodox, Conservative Judaism maintains that the juridical details and processes mainly serve higher moral purposes and could be modified if they no longer do so: \"In other words, the \"Aggadah\" should control the \"Halakha\".\" The liberal Rabbi Gordon Tucker, along with Gillman and other progressives, supported a far-reaching implementation of this approach, making Conservative Judaism much more \"Aggadic\" and allowing moral priorities an overriding authority at all occasions. This idea became very popular among the young generation, but it was not fully embraced either. In the 2006 resolution on homosexuals, the CJLS chose a middle path: they agreed that the ethical consideration of human dignity was of supreme importance, but not sufficient to uproot the express Biblical prohibition on not to lie with mankind as with womankind (traditionally understood as banning full anal intercourse). All other limitations, including on other forms of sexual relations, were lifted. A similar approach is manifest in the great weight ascribed to sociological changes in deciding religious policy. The CJLS and the Rabbinical Assembly members frequently state that circumstances were profoundly transformed in modern times, fulfilling the criteria mandating new rulings in various fields (based on general talmudic principles like \"Shinui ha-I'ttim\", \"Change of Times\"). This, along with the ethical aspect, was a main argument for revolutionizing the role of women in religious life and embracing egalitarianism.\nThe most distinctive feature of Conservative legalistic discourse, in which it is conspicuously and sharply different from Orthodoxy, is the incorporation of critical-scientific methods into the process. Deliberations almost always delineate the historical development of the specific issue at hand, from the earliest known mentions until modern times. This approach enables a thorough analysis of the manner in which it was practiced, accepted, rejected or modified in various periods, not necessarily in sync with the received rabbinic understanding. Archaeology, philology and Judaic Studies are employed; rabbis use comparative compendiums of religious manuscripts, sometimes discerning that sentences were only added later or include spelling, grammar and transcription errors, changing the entire understanding of certain passages. This critical approach is central to the movement, for its historicist underpinning stresses that all religious literature has an original meaning relevant in the context of its formulation. This meaning may be analyzed and discerned, and is distinct from the later interpretations ascribed by traditional commentators. Decisors are also far more prone to include references to external scientific sources in relevant fields, like veterinarian publications in \"Halakhic\" matters concerning livestock.\nConservative authorities, as part of their promulgation of a dynamic \"Halakha\", often cite the manner in which the sages of old used rabbinic statutes (\"Takkanah\") that enabled the bypassing of prohibitions in the Pentateuch, like the \"Prozbul\" or \"Heter I'ska\". In 1948, when employing those was first debated, Rabbi Isaac Klein argued that since there was no consensus on leadership within Catholic Israel, formulation of significant \"takkanot\" should be avoided. Another proposal, to ratify them only with a two-thirds majority in the RA, was rejected. New statues require a simple majority, 13 supporters among the 25 members of the CJLS. In the 1950s and 1960s, such drastic measures\u2014as Rabbi Arnold M. Goodman cited in a 1996 writ allowing members of the priestly caste to marry divorcees, \"Later authorities were reluctant to assume such unilateral authority... fear that invoking this principle would create the proverbial slippery slope, thereby weakening the entire \"halakhic\" structure... thus imposed severe limitations on the conditions and situations where it would be appropriate\"\u2014were carefully drafted as temporal, emergency ordinances (\"Horaat Sha'ah\"), grounded on the need the avoid a total rift of many nonobservant Jews. Later on, these ordinances became accepted and permanent on the practical level. The Conservative movement issued a wide range of new, thoroughgoing statues, from the famous 1950 responsum that allowed driving to the synagogue on the Sabbath and up to the 2000 decision to ban rabbis from inquiring about whether someone was a \"mamzer\", de facto abolishing this legal category.\nRulings and policies.\nThe RA and CJLS reached many decisions through the years, shaping a distinctive profile for Conservative practice and worship. In the 1940s, when the public demanded mixed seating of both sexes in synagogue, some rabbis argued there was no precedent but obliged on the ground of dire need (Eth la'asot), others noted that archaeological research showed no partitions in ancient synagogues. Mixed seating became commonplace in almost all congregations. In 1950, it was ruled that using electricity (that is, closure of an electrical circuit) did not constitute kindling a fire unto itself, not even in incandescent bulbs, and therefore was not a forbidden labour and could be done on the Sabbath. On that basis, while performing banned labours is of course forbidden\u2014for example, video recording is still constituted as writing\u2014switching lights and other functions are allowed, though the RA strongly urges adherents to keep the sanctity of the Sabbath (refraining from doing anything that may imitate the atmosphere of weekdays, like loud noise reminiscent of work).\nThe need to encourage arrival at synagogue also motivated the CJLS, during the same year, to issue a temporal statue allowing driving on that day, for that purpose alone; it was supported by decreeing that the combustion of fuel did not serve any of the acts prohibited during the construction of the Tabernacle, and could therefore be classified, according to their interpretation of the Tosafists' opinion, as \"redundant labour\" (\"Sh\u2019eina Tzricha L\u2019gufa\") and be permitted. The validity of this argument was heavily disputed within the movement. In 1952, members of the priestly caste were allowed to marry divorcees, conditioned on forfeiture of their privileges, as termination of marriage became widespread and women who underwent it could not be suspected of unsavory acts. In 1967, the ban on priests marrying converts was also lifted.\nIn 1954, the issue of \"agunot\" (women refused divorce by their husbands) was largely settled by adding a clause to the prenuptial contract under which men had to pay alimony as long as they did not concede. In 1968, this mechanism was replaced by a retroactive expropriation of the bride price, rendering the marriage void. In 1955, more girls were celebrating Bat Mitzvah and demanded to be allowed ascents to the Torah, the CJLS agreed that the ordinance under which women were banned from this due to respect for the congregation (\"Kvod ha'Tzibur\") was no longer relevant. In 1972 it was decreed that rennet, even if derived from unclean animals, was so transformed that it constituted a wholly new item (\"Panim Chadashot ba'u l'Khan\") and therefore all hard cheese could be considered kosher.\nThe 1970s and 1980s saw the emergence of women's rights on the main agenda. Growing pressure led the CJLS to adopt a motion that females may be counted as part of a quorum, based on the argument that only the \"Shulchan Aruch\" explicitly stated that it consist of men. While accepted, this was very controversial in the Committee and heavily disputed. A more complete solution was offered in 1983 by Rabbi Joel Roth, and was also enacted to allow women rabbinic ordination. Roth noted that some decisors of old acknowledged that women may bless when performing positive time-bound commandments (from which they are exempted, and therefore unable to fulfill the obligation for others), especially citing the manner in which they assumed upon themselves the Counting of the Omer. He suggested that women voluntarily commit to pray thrice a day et cetera, and his responsa was adopted. Since then, female rabbis were ordained at JTS and other seminaries. In 1994, the movement accepted Judith Hauptman's principally egalitarian argument, according to which equal prayer obligations for women were never banned explicitly and it was only their inferior status that hindered participation. In 2006, openly gay rabbinic candidates were also to be admitted into the JTS. In 2012, a commitment ceremony for same-sex couples was devised, though not defined as \"kiddushin\". In 2016, the rabbis passed a resolution supporting transgender rights.\nConservative Judaism in the United States held a relatively strict policy regarding intermarriage. Propositions for acknowledging Jews by patrilineal descent, as in the Reform movement, were overwhelmingly dismissed. Unconverted spouses were largely barred from community membership and participation in rituals; clergy are banned from any involvement in interfaith marriage on pain of dismissal. However, as the rate of such unions rose dramatically, Conservative congregations began describing gentile family members as \"K'rov Yisrael\" (Kin of Israel) and be more open toward them. The Leadership Council of Conservative Judaism stated in 1995: \"we want to encourage the Jewish partner to maintain his/her Jewish identity, and raise their children as Jews.\"\nDespite the centralization of legal deliberation on matters of Jewish law in the CJLS individual synagogues and communities must, in the end, depend on their local decision-makers. The rabbi in his or her or their community is regarded as the \"Mara D'Atra\", or the local \"Halakhic\" decisor. Rabbis trained in the reading practices of Conservative Jewish approaches, historical evaluation of Jewish law and interpretation of Biblical and Rabbinic texts may align directly with the CJLS decisions or themselves opine on matters based on precedents or readings of text that shine light on congregants' questions. So, for instance, a rabbi may or may not choose to permit video streaming on Shabbat despite a majority ruling that allows for use of electronics. A local \"Mara D'Atra\" may rely on the reasoning found in the majority or minority opinions of the CJLS or have other textual and halakhic grounds, i.e., prioritizing Jewish values or legal concepts, to rule one way or another on matters of ritual, family life or sacred pursuits. This balance between a centralization of \"Halakhic\" authority and maintaining the authority of local rabbis reflects the commitment to pluralism at the heart of the Movement.\nOrganization and demographics.\nThe term \"Conservative Judaism\" was used, still generically and not yet as a specific label, already in the 1887 dedication speech of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America by Rabbi Alexander Kohut. By 1901, the JTS alumni formed the Rabbinical Assembly, of which all ordained Conservative clergy in the world are members. As of 2010, there were 1,648 rabbis in the RA. In 1913, the United Synagogue of America, renamed the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism in 1991, was founded as a congregational arm of the RA. The movement established the World Council of Conservative Synagogues in 1957. Offshoots outside North America mostly adopted the Hebrew name \"Masorti\" (\"traditional\"), as did the Israeli Masorti Movement, founded in 1979, and the British Assembly of Masorti Synagogues, formed in 1985. The World Council eventually changed its primary designation to \"Masorti Olami.\" Besides the RA, the international Cantors Assembly supplies prayer leaders for congregations worldwide.\nThe United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism, covering the United States, Canada and Mexico, is by far the largest constituent of Masorti Olami. While most congregations defining themselves as \"Conservative\" are affiliated with the USCJ, some are independent. While accurate information of Canada is scant, it is estimated that some third of religiously affiliated Canadian Jews are Conservative. In 2008, the more traditional Canadian Council of Conservative Synagogues seceded from the parent organization. It numbered seven communities as of 2014. According to the Pew Research Center survey in 2013, 18 per cent of Jews in the United States and in 2020 13 per cent identified with the movement, making it the second largest in the country. Steven M. Cohen calculated that as of 2013, 962,000 U.S. Jewish adults considered themselves Conservative: 570,000 were registered congregants and further 392,000 were not members in a synagogue but identified. In addition, Cohen assumed in 2006 that 57,000 unconverted non-Jewish spouses were also registered (12 per cent of member households had one at the time): 40 per cent of members intermarry. Conservatives are also the most aged group: among those aged under 30 only 11 per cent identified as such, and there are three people over 55 for every single one aged between 35 and 44. As of November 2015, the USCJ had 580 member congregations (a sharp decline from 630 two years prior), 19 in Canada and the remainder in the United States. In 2011 the USCJ initiated a plan to reinvigorate the movement.\nBeyond North America, the movement has little presence\u2014in 2011, Rela Mintz Geffen appraised there were only 100,000 members outside the U.S. (and the former figure including Canada). \"Masorti AmLat\", the MO branch in Latin America, is the largest with 35 communities in Argentina, 7 in Brazil, 6 in Chile and further 11 in the other countries. The British Assembly of Masorti Synagogues has 13 communities and estimates its membership at over 4,000. More than 20 communities are spread across Europe, and there are 3 in Australia and 2 in Africa. The Masorti Movement in Israel incorporates some 70 communities and prayer groups with several thousand full members. In addition, while Hungarian Neolog Judaism, with a few thousands of adherents and forty partially active synagogues, is not officially affiliated with Masorti Olami, Conservative Judaism regards it as a fraternal, \"non-Orthodox but halakhic\" movement.\nIn New York, the JTS serves as the movement's original seminary and legacy institution, along with the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies at the American Jewish University in Los Angeles; the Marshall T. Meyer Latin American Rabbinical Seminary (Spanish: \"Seminario Rab\u00ednico Latinoamericano Marshall T. Meyer\"), in Buenos Aires, Argentina; and the Schechter Institute of Jewish Studies in Jerusalem. A Conservative institution that does not grant rabbinic ordination but which runs along the lines of a traditional yeshiva is the Conservative Yeshiva, located in Jerusalem. The Neolog Budapest University of Jewish Studies also maintains connections with Conservative Judaism.\nThe current chancellor of the JTS is Shuly Rubin Schwartz, in office since 2020. She is the first woman elected to this position in the history of JTS. The current dean of the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies is Bradley Shavit Artson. The Committee on Jewish Law and Standards is chaired by Rabbi Elliot N. Dorff, serving since 2007. The Rabbinical Assembly is headed by President Rabbi Debra Newman Kamin, as of 2019, and managed by Chief Executive Officer, Rabbi Jacob Blumenthal. Rabbi Blumenthal holds the joint position as CEO of the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism. The current USCJ President is Ned Gladstein. In South America, Rabbi Ariel Stofenmacher serves as chancellor in the Seminary and Rabbi Marcelo Rittner as president of Masorti AmLat. In Britain, the Masorti Assembly is chaired by Senior Rabbi Jonathan Wittenberg. In Israel, the Masorti movement's executive director is Yizhar Hess and chair Sophie Fellman Rafalovitz.\nThe global youth movement is known as NOAM, an acronym for No'ar Masorti; its North American organization is called United Synagogue Youth. Marom Israel is the Masorti movement's organization for students and young adults, providing activities based on religious pluralism and Jewish content. The Women's League for Conservative Judaism is also active in North America.\nThe USCJ maintains the Solomon Schechter Day Schools, comprising 76 day schools in 17 American states and 2 Canadian provinces serving Jewish children. Many other \"community day schools\" that are not affiliated with Schechter take a generally Conservative approach, but unlike these, generally have \"no barriers to enrollment based on the faith of the parents or on religious practices in the home\". During the first decade of the 21st century, a number of schools that were part of the Schechter network transformed themselves into non-affiliated community day schools. The USCJ also maintains the Camp Ramah system, where children and adolescents spend summers in an observant environment.\nHistory.\nPositive-Historical School.\nThe rise of modern, centralized states in Europe by the early 19th century heralded the end of Jewish judicial autonomy and social seclusion. Their communal corporate rights were abolished, and the process of emancipation and acculturation that followed quickly transformed the values and norms of the public. Estrangement and apathy toward Judaism were rampant. The process of communal, educational and civil reform could not be restricted from affecting the core tenets of the faith. The new academic, critical study of Judaism (\"Wissenschaft des Judentums\") soon became a source of controversy. Rabbis and scholars argued to what degree, if at all, its findings could be used to determine present conduct. The modernized Orthodox in Germany, like rabbis Isaac Bernays and Azriel Hildesheimer, were content to cautiously study it while stringently adhering to the sanctity of holy texts and refusing to grant \"Wissenschaft\" any say in religious matters. On the other extreme were Rabbi Abraham Geiger, who would emerge as the founding father of Reform Judaism, and his supporters. They opposed any limit on critical research or its practical application, laying more weight on the need for change than on continuity.\nThe Prague-born Rabbi Zecharias Frankel, appointed chief rabbi of the Kingdom of Saxony in 1836, gradually rose to become the leader of those who stood at the middle. Besides working for the civic betterment of local Jews and educational reform, he displayed keen interest in \"Wissenschaft\". But Frankel was always cautious and deeply reverent towards tradition, privately writing in 1836 that \"The means must be applied with such care and discretion... that forward progress will be reached unnoticed, and seem inconsequential to the average spectator.\" He soon found himself embroiled in the great disputes of the 1840s. In 1842, during the second Hamburg Temple controversy, he opposed the new Reform prayerbook, arguing the elimination of petitions for a future Return to Zion led by the Messiah was a violation of an ancient tenet. But he also opposed the ban placed on the tome by Rabbi Bernays, stating this was a primitive behaviour. In the same year, he and the moderate conservative S.L. Rapoport were the only ones of nineteen respondents who negatively answered the Breslau community's enquiry on whether the deeply unorthodox Geiger could serve there. In 1843, Frankel clashed with the radical Reform rabbi Samuel Holdheim, who argued that the act of marriage in Judaism was a civic (\"memonot\") rather than sanctified () matter and could be subject to the Law of the Land. In December 1843 Frankel launched the magazine \"Zeitschrift f\u00fcr die Religi\u00f6sen Interessen des Judenthums\". In the preamble, he attempted to present his approach to the present plight: \"The further development of Judaism cannot be done through Reform that would lead to total dissipation... But must be involved in its study... pursued via scientific research, on a \"positive, historical\" basis.\" The term Positive-Historical became associated with him and his middle way. The \"Zeitschrift\" was, along the convictions of its publisher, neither dogmatically orthodox nor overly polemic, wholly opposing Biblical criticism and arguing for the antiquity of custom and practice.\nIn 1844, Geiger and like-minded allies arranged a conference in Braunschweig that was to have enough authority (since 1826, Rabbi Aaron Chorin called for the convocation of a new \"Sanhedrin\") to debate and enact thoroughgoing revisions. Frankel was willing to agree only to a meeting without any practical results, and refused the invitation. When the protocols, which contained many radical statements, were published, he denounced the assembly for \"applying the scalpel of criticism\" and favouring the spirit of the age over tradition. However, he later agreed to attend the second conference, held in Frankfurt am Main on 15 July 1845\u2014in spite of warnings from Rapoport, who cautioned that compromise with Geiger was impossible and he would only damage his reputation among the traditionalists. On the 16th, the issue of Hebrew in the liturgy arose. Most present were inclined to retain it, but with more German segments. A small majority adopted a resolution stating there were subjective, but no objective, imperatives to keep it as the language of service. Frankel then astounded his peers by vehemently protesting, stating it was a breach with the past and that Hebrew was of dire importance and great sentimental value. The others immediately began quoting all passages in rabbinic literature allowing prayer in the vernacular. Frankel could not contend with the \"halakhic\" validity of their decision, but he perceived it as a sign of profound differences between them. On the 17th he formally withdrew, publishing a lambasting critique of the procedures. \"Opponents of the conference, who feared he went to the other side,\" noted historian Michael A. Meyer, \"now felt reassured of his loyalty\".\nThe rabbi of Saxony had many sympathizers, who supported a similarly moderate approach and change only on the basis of the authority of the Talmud. When Geiger began preparing a third conference in Breslau, Hirsch B\u00e4r Fassel convinced Frankel to organize one of his own in protest. Frankel invited colleagues to an assembly in Dresden, which was to be held on 21 October 1846. He announced that one measure he was willing to countenance was the possible abolition of the second day of festivals, though only if a broad consensus will be reached and not before thorough deliberation. Attendants were to include Rapoport, Fassel, Adolf Jellinek, Leopold L\u00f6w, Michael Sachs, Abraham Kohn and others. However, the Dresden assembly soon drew heated Orthodox resistance, especially from Rabbi Jacob Ettlinger, and was postponed indefinitely.\nIn 1854, Frankel was appointed chancellor in the new Jewish Theological Seminary of Breslau, the first modern rabbinical seminary in Germany. His opponents on both flanks were incensed. Geiger and the Reform camp long accused him of theological ambiguity, hypocrisy and attachment to stagnant remnants, and now protested the \"medieval\" atmosphere in the seminary, which was mainly concerned with teaching Jewish Law. The hardline Orthodox Samson Raphael Hirsch, who fiercely opposed \"Wissenschaft\" and emphasized the divine origin of the entire \"halakhic\" system in the Theophany at Sinai, was deeply suspicious of Frankel's beliefs, use of science and constant assertions that Jewish Law was flexible and evolving.\nThe final schism between Frankel and the Orthodox occurred after the 1859 publication of his \"Darke ha-Mishna\" (Ways of the Mishna). He heaved praise on the Beatified Sages, presenting them as bold innovators, but not once affirmed the divinity of the Oral Torah. On the ordinances classified as Law given to Moses at Sinai, he quoted Asher ben Jehiel that stated several of those were only apocryphally dubbed as such; he applied the latter's conclusion to all, noting they were \"so evident \"as if\" given at Sinai\". Hirsch branded Frankel a heretic, demanding he announce whether he believed that both the Oral and Written Torah were of celestial origin. Rabbis Benjamin Hirsch Auerbach, Solomon Klein and others published more complaisant tracts, but also requested an explanation. Rapoport marshaled to Frankel's aid, assuring that his words were merely reiterating ben Jehiel's and that he would soon release a statement that will belie Hirsch's accusations. But then the Chancellor of Breslau issued an ambiguous defence, writing that his book was not concerned with theology and avoiding giving any clear answer. Now even Rapoport joined his critics.\nHirsch succeeded, severely tarnishing Frankel's reputation among most concerned. Along with fellow Orthodox Rabbi Azriel Hildesheimer, Hirsch launched a protracted public campaign through the 1860s. They ceaselessly stressed the chasm between an Orthodox understanding of \"Halakha\" as derived and revealed, applied differently to different circumstances and subject to human judgement and possibly error, yet unchanging and divine in principle\u2014as opposed to an evolutionary, historicist and non-dogmatic approach in which past authorities were not just elaborating but consciously innovating, as taught by Frankel. Hildesheimer often repeated that this issue utterly overshadowed any specific technical argument with the Breslau School (the students of which were often more lenient on matters of headcovering for women, Chalav Yisrael and other issues). Hildesheimer was concerned that Jewish public opinion perceived no practical difference between them; though he cared to distinguish the observant acolytes of Frankel from the Reform camp, he noted in his diary: \"How meager is the principal difference between the Breslau School, who don silk gloves at their work, and Geiger who wields a sledgehammer.\" In 1863, when Breslau faculty member Heinrich Graetz published an article where he appeared to doubt the Messianic belief, Hildesheimer immediately seized upon the occasion to prove once more the dogmatic, rather than practical, divide. He denounced Graetz as a heretic.\nThe Positive-Historical School was influential, but never institutionalized itself as thoroughly as its opponents. Apart from the many graduates of Breslau, Isaac Noah Mannheimer, Adolf Jellinek and Rabbi Moritz G\u00fcdemann led the central congregation in Vienna along a similar path. In Jellinek's local seminary, Meir Friedmann and Isaac Hirsch Weiss followed Frankel's moderate approach to critical research. The rabbinate of the liberal Neolog public in Hungary, which formally separated from the Orthodox, was also permeated with the \"Breslau spirit\". Many of its members studied there, and its Jewish Theological Seminary of Budapest was modeled after it, though the assimilationist congregants cared little for rabbinic opinion. In Germany itself, Breslau alumni founded in 1868 a short-lived society, the J\u00fcdisch-Theologische Verein. It was dissolved within a year, boycotted by both Reform and Orthodox. Michael Sachs led the Berlin congregation in a very conservative style, eventually resigning when an organ was introduced in services. Manuel Jo\u00ebl, another of the Frankelist party, succeeded Geiger in Breslau. He maintained his predecessor's truncated German translation of the liturgy for the sake of compromise, but restored the full Hebrew text.\nThe Breslau Seminary and the Reform Hochschule f\u00fcr die Wissenschaft des Judentums maintained very different approaches; but on the communal level, the former's alumni failure to organize or articulate a coherent agenda, coupled with the declining prestige of Breslau and the conservatism of the Hochschule's alumni\u2014a necessity in heterogeneous communities which remained unified, especially after the Orthodox gained the right to secede in 1876\u2014imposed a rather uniform and mild character on what was known in Germany as \"Liberal Judaism\". In 1909, 63 rabbis associated with the Breslau approach founded the Freie J\u00fcdische Vereinigung, another brief attempt at institutionalization, but it too failed soon. Only in 1925 did the Religi\u00f6se Mittelpartei f\u00fcr Frieden und Einheit succeed in driving the same agenda. It won several seats in communal elections, but was small and of little influence.\nJewish Theological Seminary.\nJewish immigration to the United States bred an amalgam of loose communities, lacking strong tradition or stable structures. In this free-spirited environment, a multitude of forces was at work. As early as 1866, Rabbi Jonas Bondi of New York wrote that a Judaism of the \"golden middleway, which was termed Orthodox by the left and heterodox or reformer by the right\" developed in the new country. The rapid ascendancy of Reform Judaism by the 1880s left few who opposed it, merely a handful of congregations and ministers remained outside the Union of American Hebrew Congregations. These included Sabato Morais and Rabbi Henry Pereira Mendes of the elitist Sephardi congregations, along with rabbis Bernard Drachman (ordained at Breslau, though he regarded himself as Orthodox) and Henry Schneeberger.\nWhile spearheaded by radical and principled Reformers like Rabbi Kaufmann Kohler, the UAHC was also home to more conservative elements. President Isaac Meyer Wise, a pragmatist intent on compromise, hoped to forge a broad consensus that would turn a moderate version of Reform to dominant in America. He kept the dietary laws at home and attempted to assuage traditionalists. On 11 July 1883, apparently due to negligence by the Jewish caterer, non-kosher dishes were served to UAHC rabbis in Wise's presence. Known to posterity as the \"trefa banquet\", it purportedly made some guests abandon the hall in disgust, but little is factually known about the incident. In 1885, the traditionalist forces were bolstered upon the arrival of Rabbi Alexander Kohut, an adherent of Frankel. He publicly excoriated Reform for disdaining ritual and received forms, triggering a heated polemic with Kohler. The debate was one of the main factors which motivated the latter to compose the Pittsburgh Platform, which unambiguously declared the principles of Reform Judaism: \"to-day we accept as binding only the moral laws, and maintain only such ceremonies as elevate and sanctify our lives.\"\nThe explicit wording alienated a handful of conservative UAHC ministers: Henry Hochheimer, Frederick de Sola Mendes, Aaron Wise, Marcus Jastrow, and Benjamin Szold. They joined Kohut, Morais and the others in seeking to establish a traditional rabbinic seminary that would serve as a counterweight to Hebrew Union College. In 1886, they founded the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York City. Kohut, professor of Talmud who held to the Positive-Historical ideal, was the main educational influence in the early years, prominent among the founders who encompassed the entire spectrum from progressive Orthodox to the brink of Reform; to describe what the seminary intended to espouse, he used the term \"Conservative Judaism\", which had no independent meaning at the time and was only in relation to Reform. In 1898, Pereira Mendes, Schneeberger and Drachman also founded the Orthodox Union, which maintained close ties with the seminary.\nThe JTS was a small, fledgling institution with financial difficulties, and was ordaining merely a rabbi per year. But soon after Chancellor Morais' death in 1897, its fortunes turned. Since 1881, a wave of Jewish immigration from Eastern Europe was inundating the country\u2014by 1920, 2.5 million of them had arrived, increasing American Jewry tenfold. They came from regions where civil equality or emancipation were never granted, while acculturation and modernization made little headway. Whether devout or irreligious, they mostly retained strong traditional sentiments in matters of faith, accustomed to old-style rabbinate; the hardline Agudas HaRabbanim, founded by emigrant clergy, opposed secular education or vernacular sermons, and its members spoke almost only Yiddish. The Eastern Europeans were alienated by the local Jews, who were all assimilated in comparison, and especially aghast by the mores of Reform. The need to find a religious framework that would both accommodate and Americanize them motivated Jacob Schiff and other rich philanthropists, all Reform and of German descent, to donate $500,000 to the JTS. The contribution was solicited by Professor Cyrus Adler. It was conditioned on the appointment of Solomon Schechter as Chancellor. In 1901, the Rabbinical Assembly was established as the fraternity of JTS alumni.\nSchechter arrived in 1902, and at once reorganized the faculty, dismissing both Pereira Mendes and Drachman for lack of academic merit. Under his aegis, the institute began to draw famous scholars, becoming a center of learning on par with HUC. Schechter was both traditional in sentiment and quite unorthodox in conviction. He maintained that theology was of little importance and it was practice that must be preserved. He aspired to solicit unity in American Judaism, denouncing sectarianism and not perceiving himself as leading a new denomination: \"not to create a new party, but to consolidate an old one\". The need to raise funds convinced him that a congregational arm for the Rabbinical Assembly and the JTS was required. On 23 February 1913, he founded the United Synagogue of America (since 1991: United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism), which then consisted of 22 communities. He and Mendes first came to major disagreement; Schechter insisted that any alumnus could be appointed to the USoA's managerial board, and not just to serve as communal rabbi, including several the latter did not consider sufficiently devout, or who tolerated mixed seating in their synagogues (though some of those he still regarded as Orthodox). Mendes, president of the Orthodox Union, therefore refused to join. He began to distinguish between the \"Modern Orthodoxy\" of himself and his peers in the OU, and \"Conservatives\" who tolerated what was beyond the pale for him. However, this first sign of institutionalization and separation was far from conclusive. Mendes himself could not clearly differentiate between the two groups, and many he viewed as Orthodox were members of the USoA. The epithets \"Conservative\" and \"Orthodox\" remained interchangeable for decades to come. JTS graduates served in OU congregations; many students of the Orthodox Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary and members of the OU's Rabbinical Council of America, or RCA, attended it. In 1926, RIETS and the JTS even negotiated a possible merger, though it was never materialized. Upon Schechter's death in 1915, the first generation of his disciples kept his non-sectarian legacy of striving for a united, traditional American Judaism. He was replaced by Cyrus Adler.\nThe USoA grew rapidly as the Eastern European immigrant population slowly integrated. In 1923 it already had 150 affiliated communities, and 229 before 1930. Synagogues offered a more modernized ritual: English sermons, choir singing, late Friday evening services which tacitly acknowledging that most had to work until after the Sabbath began, and often mixed-gender seating. Men and women sat separately with no partition, and some houses of prayer already introduced family pews. Motivated by popular pressure and frowned upon by both RA and seminary faculty\u2014in its own synagogue, the institute maintained a partition until 1983\u2014this was becoming common among the OU as well. As both social conditions and apathy turned American Jews away from tradition (barely 20 per cent were attending prayers weekly), a young professor named Mordecai Kaplan promoted the idea of transforming the synagogue into a community center, a \"Shul with a Pool\", a policy which indeed stymied the tide somewhat.\nIn 1927, the RA also established its own Committee of Jewish Law, entrusted with determining \"halakhic\" issues. Consisting of seven members, it was chaired by the traditionalist Rabbi Louis Ginzberg, who already distinguished himself in 1922, drafting a responsa that allowed the use of grape juice rather than fermented wine for \"Kiddush\" on the background of Prohibition. Kaplan himself, who rose to become an influential and popular figure within the JTS, concluded that his fellow rabbis' ambiguity in matters of belief and the contradiction between full observance and critical study were untenable and hypocritical. He formulated his own approach of Judaism as a Civilization, rejecting the concept of Revelation and any supernatural belief in favour of a cultural-ethnic perception. While valuing received mores, he eventually suggested giving the past \"a vote, not a veto\". Though popular among students, Kaplan's nascent Reconstructionism was opposed by the new traditionalist Chancellor Louis Finkelstein, appointed in 1940, and a large majority among the faculty.\nTensions within the JTS and RA grew. The Committee of Jewish Law consisted mainly of scholars who had little field experience, almost solely from the seminary's Talmudic department. They were greatly concerned with \"halakhic\" licitness and indifferent to the pressures exerted on the pulpit rabbis, who had to contend with an Americanized public which cared little for such considerations or for tradition in general. In 1935, the RA almost adopted a groundbreaking motion: Rabbi Louis Epstein offered a solution to the agunah predicament, a clause that would have had husbands appoint wives as their proxies to issue divorce. It was repealed under pressure from the Orthodox Union. As late as 1947, CJL Chair Rabbi Boaz Cohen, himself a historicist who argued that the Law evolved much through time, rebuked pulpit clergy who requested lenient or radical rulings, stating he and his peers were content to \"progress in inches... Free setting up of new premises and the introduction of novel categories of ritual upon the basis of pure reason and thinking would be perilous, if not fatal, to the principles and continuity of Jewish Law.\"\nA third movement.\nThe boundaries between Orthodox and Conservative Judaism in America were institutionalized only in the aftermath of World War II. The 1940s saw the younger generation of JTS graduates less patient with the prudence of the CJL and Talmud faculty in face of popular demand. Kaplan's Reconstructionism, while its fully committed partisans were few, had much influence. The majority among recent alumni eschewed the epithet \"Orthodox\" and tended to employ \"Conservative\" exclusively. Succeeding Schechter's direct disciples who headed the RA, JTS and United Synagogue in the interwar period, a new strata of activist leaders was rising. Rabbi Robert Gordis, RA president in 1944\u20131946, represented the junior members in advocating more flexibility; Rabbi Jacob Agus, a RIETS graduate who joined the body only in 1945, clamored that \"we need a law making body, not a law interpreting committee.\" Agus argued that the breach between the Jewish public and tradition was too wide to be bridged conventionally, and that the RA would always remain inferior to the Orthodox as long as it retained its policy of merely adopting lenient precedents in rabbinic literature. He offered to extensively apply the tool of \"takkanah\", rabbinic ordinance.\nIn 1946, a committee chaired by Gordis issued the \"Sabbath and Festival Prayerbook\", the first clearly Conservative liturgy: references to the sacrificial cult were in the past tense instead of a petition for restoration, and it rephrased blessings such as \"who hast made me according to thy will\" for women to \"who hast made me a woman\". During the movement's national conference in Chicago, held 13\u201317 May 1948, the pulpit rabbis in the RA gained the upper hand. Spurred by Gordis, Agus and fellow leaders, they voted to reorganize the CJL into a Committee of Jewish Law and Standards, enfranchised to issue \"takkanot\" by a majority. Membership was conditioned on having experience as a congregational rabbi, and unseasoned JTS faculty were thus denied entrance. While the RA was asserting a Conservative distinctive identity, the seminary remained more cautious. Finkelstein opposed sectarianism and preferred the neutral epithet \"traditional\", later commenting that \"Conservative Judaism is a gimmick to get Jews back to real Judaism\". He and the very right-wing Talmud professor Saul Lieberman, who maintained ties with the Orthodox while also viewing them as obstructionist and ossified, dominated the JTS, providing a counterweight to the liberals in the Assembly. Kaplan, meanwhile, spent more time on consolidating his Society for Advancement of Judaism. Abraham Joshua Heschel, who espoused a mysticist understanding of Jewish religion, also became an important figure among the faculty.\nThe CJLS now proceeded to demonstrate its independence. Sabbath was widely desecrated by a large majority of Jews, and the board believed attendance at synagogues should be encouraged. They therefore enacted an ordinance that allowed driving on the Sabbath (for worship alone) and the use of electricity. The driving responsum was later severely criticized by Conservative rabbis, and was charged with imparting that the movement was overly keen to condone the laxity of congregants. It also signified the final break with the Orthodox, who were themselves being bolstered by more strictly observant immigrants from Europe. In 1954, the RCA reversed its 1948 ruling that allowed the use of microphones on Sabbath and festivals and declared that praying without a partition between sexes was banned. Though enforced slowly\u2014in 1997, there were still seven OU congregations with no physical barrier, and so-called \"Conservadox\" remain extant\u2014these two attributes became a demarcation line between Orthodox and Conservative synagogues. RA converts were denied ablution in Orthodox ritual baths, and rabbis from one movement would gradually cease serving in the other's communities.\nRather than a force within American Judaism, the JTS-centered movement emerged as a third movement. The historicist and critical approach to \"halakha\", as well as other features, were emphasized by leaders eager to demonstrate their uniqueness. In their efforts to solidify a coherent identity, Conservative thinkers like Mordecai Waxman in his 1957 \"Tradition and Change\", ventured beyond Schechter's conceptions to Rabbi Zecharias Frankel and Breslau, presenting themselves as its direct inheritors via Alexander Kohut and others. The CJLS continued to issue groundbreaking ordinances and rulings.\nThe postwar decades were a time of immense growth for the Conservative movement. Most of the 500,000 decommissioned Jewish GIs left the densely populated immigrant neighbourhoods of the East Coast, moving to suburbia. They were Americanized but still retained traditional sentiments, and Reform Judaism was too radical for most. The United Synagogue of America offered Jewish education for children and a familiar religious environment which was also comfortable and not strict. It expanded from 350 communities by 1945 to 832 by 1971, becoming the largest denomination, with some 350,000 dues-paying member households (1.5 million people) at synagogues and over 40 per cent of American Jewry identifying with it in polls, adding an estimated million more non-registered supporters.\nAlready in a 1955 study, Marshall Sklare defined Conservative Judaism as the quintessential American Jewish movement, but stressed the gap between laity and clergy, noting \"rabbis now recognize that they are not making decisions or writing responsa, but merely taking a poll of their membership.\" Most congregants, commented Edward S. Shapiro, were \"Conservative Jews because their rabbi kept kosher and the Sabbath... Not because of their religious behavior.\" The movement established its presence outside the U.S. and Canada: In 1962, the young Rabbi Marshall Meyer founded the Seminario Rabinico Latinoamericano in Buenos Aires, which would serve as the basis for Conservative expansion in South America. In 1979, four communities formed the Israel Masorti Movement. Rabbi Louis Jacobs, dismissed in 1964 from the British Orthodox rabbinate on the charge of heresy after espousing a non-literal understanding of the Torah, joined with the Conservatives and founded his country's first Masorti community. The new branches were all united within the World Council of Synagogues, later to be named Masorti Olami.\nThe movement peaked in numbers in the 1970s. During that decade, the tensions between the various elements within it intensified. The right wing, conservative in \"halakhic\" matters and often adhering to a verbal understanding of revelation, was dismayed by the failure to bolster observance among the laity and the resurgence of Orthodoxy. The left was influenced by the Reconstructionists, who formed their own seminary in 1968 and were slowly coalescing, as well as the growing appeal of Reform, which turned more traditional and threatened to sway congregants. While the rightists opposed further modifications, their left-wing peers demanded them. The Chavurah movement, consisting of nonaligned prayer quorums of young (and frequently, Conservative-raised) worshipers who sought a more intense religious experience, also weakened congregations. In 1972, the liberal wing gained an influential position with the appointment of Gerson D. Cohen as JTS Chancellor. During the same year, after Reform began to ordain female rabbis, a strong lobby rose to advocate the same. The CJLS rapidly enacted an ordinance which allowed women to be tallied for a \"minyan\", and by 1976 the percentage of synagogues allowing them to bless during the reading of the Torah grew from 7 per cent to 50 per cent. In 1979, ignoring the denominational leadership, Beth Israel Congregation of Chester County accepted the RRC-ordained Rabbi Linda Joy Holtzman. Pressures to allow women to assume rabbinical positions was mounting from the congregational level, though the RA agreed to delay any action until the JTS scholars would concur.\nFemale ordination was a matter of great friction until 1983, when Rabbi Joel Roth devised a solution that entailed women voluntarily accepting the obligation to pray regularly. The leadership passed it not by scholarly consensus but via a popular vote of all JTS faculty, including non-specialists. Two years later, the first JTS-ordained female rabbi, Amy Eilberg, was admitted into the RA. David Weiss Halivni, professor of the Talmud faculty, claimed that Roth's method must have required waiting until a considerable number of women did prove sufficient commitment. He and his sympathizers regarded the vote as belying any claim to \"halakhic\" integrity. They formed the Union for Traditional Conservative Judaism in 1985, a right-wing lobby which numbered some 10,000 supporters from the Conservative observant elite. The UTJC withdrew from the movement and erased the word \"Conservative\" in 1990, attempting to merge with moderate Orthodox organizations.\nIn the very same year, the Reconstructionist also seceded fully, joining the World Union for Progressive Judaism under observer status. The double defection narrowed the movement's spectrum of opinions, at a time when large swaths of congregants were abandoning in favour of Reform, which was more tolerant of intermarriage. RA leaders were engaged in introspection through the later 1980s, resulting in the 1988 \"Emet ve-Emunah\" platform, while Reform slowly bypassed them and became the largest American Jewish movement.\nAfter the issue of egalitarianism for women subsided, LGBT acceptance replaced it as the main source of contention between the declining right wing and the liberal majority. A first attempt was rebuffed in 1992 by a harsh responsum written by Roth. The retirement of Chancellor Ismar Schorsch, a staunch opponent, allowed the CJLS to endorse a motion which still banned anal intercourse but not any other physical contact, and allowed the ordination of openly LGBT rabbis, in 2006. Roth and three other supporters resigned from the panel in protest, claiming the responsum was not valid; Masorti affiliates in South America, Israel and Hungary objected severely. The Seminario is yet to accept the resolution, while several Canadian congregations seceded from the United Synagogue in 2008 to form an independent union in protest of the slide to the left. Since the 2013 Pew survey, which assessed that only 18 per cent of American Jews identify with it, Conservative leadership is engaged in attempting to solve Conservative Judaism's demographic crisis."}
{"id": "6625", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6625", "title": "Catholcism", "text": ""}
{"id": "6626", "revid": "13916673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6626", "title": "CDE", "text": "CDE may refer to:"}
{"id": "6627", "revid": "43937806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6627", "title": "Common Desktop Environment", "text": "The Common Desktop Environment (CDE) is a desktop environment for Unix and OpenVMS, based on the Motif widget toolkit. It was part of the UNIX 98 Workstation Product Standard, and was for a long time the Unix desktop associated with commercial Unix workstations. It helped to influence early implementations of successor projects such as KDE and GNOME, which largely replaced CDE following the turn of the century.\nAfter a long history as proprietary software, CDE was released as free software on August 6, 2012, under the GNU Lesser General Public License, version 2.0 or later. Since its release as free software, CDE has been ported to Linux and BSD derivatives.\nHistory.\nHewlett-Packard, IBM, SunSoft, and USL announced CDE in June 1993 as a joint development within the Common Open Software Environment (COSE) initiative. Each development group contributed its own technology to CDE:\nAfter its release, HP endorsed CDE as the new standard desktop for Unix, and provided documentation and software for migrating HP VUE customizations to CDE.\nIn March 1994 CDE became the responsibility of the \"new OSF\", a merger of the Open Software Foundation and Unix International;\nin September 1995, the merger of Motif and CDE into a single project, CDE/Motif, was announced. OSF became part of the newly formed Open Group in 1996.\nIn February 1997, the Open Group released their last major version of CDE, version 2.1.\nRed Hat Linux was the only Linux distribution that proprietary CDE was ported to. In 1997, Red Hat began offering a version of CDE licensed from TriTeal Corporation. In 1998, Xi Graphics, a company specializing in the X Windowing System, offered a version of CDE bundled with Red Hat Linux, called \"Xi Graphics maXimum cde/OS\". These were phased out, and Red Hat moved to the GNOME desktop.\nUntil about 2000, users of Unix desktops regarded CDE as the \"de facto\" standard, but at that time, other desktop environments such as GNOME and K Desktop Environment 2 were quickly becoming mature, and became widespread on Linux systems.\nIn 2001, Sun Microsystems announced that they would phase out CDE as the standard desktop environment in Solaris in favor of GNOME. Solaris 10, released in early 2005, includes both CDE and the GNOME-based Java Desktop System. The OpenSolaris project, begun around the same time, did not include CDE, and had no intent to make Solaris CDE available as open-source. The original release of Solaris 11 in November 2011 only contained GNOME as standard desktop, though some CDE libraries, such as Motif and ToolTalk, remained for binary compatibility but Oracle Solaris 11.4, released in August 2018, removed support for the CDE runtime environment and background services.\nLicense history.\nFrom its launch until 2012, CDE was proprietary software.\nMotif, the toolkit on which CDE is built, was released by The Open Group in 2000 as \"Open Motif,\" under a \"revenue sharing\" license. That license did not meet either the open source or free software definitions. The Open Group had wished to make Motif open source, but did not succeed doing so at that time.\nRelease under the GNU LGPL.\nIn 2006, a petition was created asking The Open Group to release the source code for CDE and Motif under a free license. On August 6, 2012, CDE was released under the LGPL-2.0-or-later license. The CDE source code was then released to SourceForge.\nThe free software project OpenCDE had been started in 2010 to reproduce the look and feel, organization, and feature set of CDE. In August 2012, when CDE was released as free software, OpenCDE was officially deprecated in favor of CDE.\nOn October 23, 2012, the Motif widget toolkit was also released under the LGPL-2.1-or-later license. This allowed CDE to become a completely free and open source desktop environment.\nShortly after CDE was released as free software, a Linux live CD was created based on Debian 6 with CDE 2.2.0c pre-installed, called CDEbian. The live CD has since been discontinued.\nThe Debian-based Linux distribution SparkyLinux offers binary packages of CDE that can be installed with APT. As of March 2023, CDE is also included in the NuTyX GNU/Linux distribution which offers an ISO download image with it, in FreeBSD and in source form in pkgsrc which is the default package manager of NetBSD.\nDevelopment under CDE project.\nIn March 2014, the first stable release of CDE, version 2.2.1, was made since its release as free software.\nBeginning with version 2.2.2, released in July 2014, CDE is able to compile under FreeBSD 10 with the default Clang compiler.\nSince version 2.3.0, released in July 2018, CDE uses TIRPC on Linux, so that the portmapper rpcbind does not need to be run in insecure mode. It does not use Xprint anymore, and can be compiled on the BSDs without installing first a custom version of Motif. Multihead display support with Xinerama has been improved.\nSince its release as free software, CDE has been ported to:\nFuture project goals of the CDE project include:"}
{"id": "6628", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6628", "title": "Children of Dune", "text": "Children of Dune is a 1976 science fiction novel by Frank Herbert, the third in his \"Dune\" series of six novels. Originally serialized in \"Analog Science Fiction and Fact\" in 1976, it was the last \"Dune\" novel to be serialized before book publication.\nAt the end of \"Dune Messiah\", Paul Atreides walks into the desert, a blind man, leaving his sister Alia to rule the universe as regent for his twin children, Leto II and Ghanima. Awakened in the womb by the spice, the children are the heirs to Paul's prescient vision of the fate of the universe, a role that Alia desperately craves. House Corrino schemes to return to the throne, while the Bene Gesserit make common cause with the Tleilaxu and Spacing Guild to gain control of the spice and Paul's children.\nInitially selling over 75,000 copies, it became the first hardcover best-seller in science fiction. The novel was critically well-received for its plot, action, and atmosphere and was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1977. \"Dune Messiah\" (1969) and \"Children of Dune\" were collectively adapted by the Sci-Fi Channel in 2003 into a miniseries titled \"Frank Herbert's Children of Dune\".\nPlot.\nNine years after Emperor Paul \"Muad'Dib\" Atreides walked into the desert, the ecological transformation of Dune has reached the point where some Fremen are living without stillsuits in the less arid climate and have started to move out of the sietches and into the villages and cities. As the old ways erode, more and more pilgrims arrive to experience the planet of Muad'Dib. The imperial high council has lost its political might and is powerless to control the jihad.\nPaul's young twin children, Leto II and Ghanima, have concluded that their aunt and guardian Alia has succumbed to Abomination\u2014possession by her grandfather Baron Vladimir Harkonnen\u2014and fear that a similar fate awaits them. They (and Alia) also realize that the terraforming of Dune will kill all the sandworms, thus destroying the source of the spice, but the Baron desires this outcome. Leto also fears that, like his father, he will become trapped by his prescience.\nMeanwhile, a new religious figure called \"The Preacher\" has risen in the desert, rallying against the religious government's injustices and the changes among the Fremen. Some Fremen believe he is Paul Atreides. Princess Wensicia of the fallen House Corrino on Salusa Secundus plots to assassinate the twins and regain power for her House.\nLady Jessica returns to Arrakis and recognizes that her daughter is possessed, but finds no signs of Abomination in the twins. Leto arranges for Fremen leader Stilgar to protect Ghanima if there is an attempt on their lives. The Preacher journeys to Salusa Secundus to meet Wensicia's son Farad'n, and in return pledges the Duncan Idaho ghola as an agent of House Corrino. Alia attempts to assassinate Jessica, who escapes into the desert with Duncan's help, precipitating a rebellion among the Fremen. The twins anticipate and survive the Corrino assassination plot, faking Leto's death. \nLeto leaves to seek out Jacurutu, a mythical Fremen sietch and possible holdout of the Preacher, while Ghanima, changing her memory with self-hypnosis, reports (and believes) that her brother has been murdered. Duncan and Jessica flee to Salusa Secundus, where Jessica begins to mentor Farad'n in the ways of the Bene Gesserit. He sidelines and publicly denounces his regent mother Wensicia over the assassination attempt, and allies with the Bene Gesserit, who promise to marry him to Ghanima and support his bid to become Emperor.\nA band of Fremen outlaws capture Leto and force him to undergo the spice trance at the suggestion of Gurney Halleck, who has infiltrated the group on Jessica's orders. Leto's spice-induced visions show him a myriad of possible futures where humanity becomes extinct and only one where it survives. He names this future \"The Golden Path\" and resolves to bring it to fruition\u2014something that his father, who had already glimpsed this future, refused to do. He escapes his captors and sacrifices his humanity in pursuit of the Golden Path by physically fusing with a school of sandtrout, the larval form of sandworms, in the process gaining superhuman strength and near-invulnerability. He travels across the desert destroying qanats to slow down the ecological transformation of Dune, and eventually confronts the Preacher, who is indeed Paul.\nDuncan returns to Arrakis and provokes Stilgar into killing him so that Stilgar is forced to take Ghanima and go into hiding. Eventually though, Alia recaptures Ghanima and arranges her marriage to Farad'n, planning to exploit the expected chaos when Ghanima kills him to avenge her brother's murder. Paul and Leto return to the capital, where Jessica and Farad'n have arrived for his betrothal to Ghanima, to confront Alia. Upon arriving, Paul is publicly murdered by agents of Alia's government, to her horror. Leto reveals himself in a display of superhuman strength and triggers the return of Ghanima's genuine memories. He confronts Alia and offers to help her overcome her possession, but the Baron resists. Alia, whilst fighting the Baron's possession, manages to throw herself off a high balcony, killing both herself and the Baron.\nLeto declares himself Emperor and asserts control over the Fremen. Farad'n enlists in his service and delivers control of the Corrino armies and his Sardaukar. In describing the Golden Path to Farad'n, Leto reveals that he will live for thousands of years due to the sandworm skin and genetics he is encased in. Leto marries Ghanima to consolidate power, but because his sandworm skin destroyed his ability to reproduce, he allows Farad'n to be her true consort so the Atreides line can continue. Ghanima reflects that one twin had to follow the Path, but Leto was always the stronger.\nPublication history.\nParts of \"Dune Messiah\" and \"Children of Dune\" were written before \"Dune\" was completed. \"Children of Dune\" was originally serialized in \"Analog Science Fiction and Fact\" in 1976, and was the last \"Dune\" novel to be serialized before book publication. \"Dune Messiah\" and \"Children of Dune\" were published in one volume by the Science Fiction Book Club in 2002.\nAnalysis.\nHerbert likened the initial trilogy of novels (\"Dune\", \"Dune Messiah\", and \"Children of Dune\") to a fugue \u2013 \"Dune\" was a heroic melody, \"Dune Messiah\" was its inversion, while \"Children of Dune\" expands the number of interplaying themes. Paul rises to power in \"Dune\" by seizing control of the single critical resource in the universe, melange. His enemies are dead or overthrown, and he is set to take the reins of power and bring a hard but enlightened peace to the universe. Herbert chose in the books that followed to undermine Paul's triumph with a string of failures and philosophical paradoxes.\nCritical reception.\nInitially selling over 75,000 copies, \"Children of Dune\" became the first hardcover best-seller in the science fiction field. The novel was critically well-received for its gripping plot, action, and atmosphere, and was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1977.\nThe \"Los Angeles Times\" called \"Children of Dune\" \"a major event\", and \"Challenging Destiny\" noted that \"Herbert adds enough new twists and turns to the ongoing saga that familiarity with the recurring elements brings pleasure.\" \"Publishers Weekly\" wrote, \"Ranging from palace intrigue and desert chases to religious speculation and confrontations with the supreme intelligence of the universe, there is something here for all science fiction fans.\" In a 1976 review, Spider Robinson found \"Children of Dune\" unsatisfying, faulting the ending as unconvincing and thematically overfamiliar. The novel is referred to in \"A Thousand Plateaus\" (1980) by Gilles Deleuze and F\u00e9lix Guattari. David Pringle gave the novel a rating of two stars out of four and described the novel as \"dark and convoluted stuff.\"\nAdaptation.\n\"Dune Messiah\" (1969) and \"Children of Dune\" were collectively adapted by the Sci-Fi Channel in 2003 into a miniseries titled \"Frank Herbert's Children of Dune\". The three-part, six-hour miniseries covers the bulk of the plot of \"Dune Messiah\" in the first installment, and adapts \"Children of Dune\" in the second and third parts."}
{"id": "6629", "revid": "38056903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6629", "title": "Candide", "text": "' ( , ) is a French satire written by Voltaire, a philosopher of the Age of Enlightenment, first published in 1759. The novella has been widely translated, with English versions titled Candide: or, All for the Best (1759); Candide: or, The Optimist (1762); and Candide: Optimism\"\"' (1947). A young man, Candide, lives a sheltered life in an Edenic paradise, being indoctrinated with Leibnizian optimism by his mentor, Professor Pangloss. This lifestyle is abruptly ended, followed by Candide's slow and painful disillusionment as he witnesses and experiences great hardships in the world. Voltaire concludes \"Candide\" with, if not rejecting Leibnizian optimism outright, advocating a deeply practical precept, \"we must cultivate our garden\", in lieu of the Leibnizian mantra of Pangloss, \"all is for the best\" in the \"best of all possible worlds\".\n\"Candide\" is characterized by its tone as well as its erratic, fantastical, and fast-moving plot. A picaresque novel with a story akin to a serious bildungsroman, it parodies many adventure and romance clich\u00e9s, in a tone that is bitter and matter-of-fact. The events discussed are often based on historical happenings. As philosophers of Voltaire's day contended with the problem of evil, so does Candide, albeit more directly and humorously. Voltaire ridicules religion, theologians, governments, armies, philosophies, and philosophers. Through \"Candide\", he assaults Leibniz and his optimism.\n\"Candide\" has enjoyed both great success and great scandal. Immediately after its secretive publication, the book was widely banned because of its religious blasphemy, political sedition, and intellectual hostility hidden under a thin veil of naivety. However, with its sharp wit and insightful portrayal of the human condition, the novel has inspired many later authors and artists. Today, \"Candide\" is considered Voltaire's \"magnum opus\" and is often listed as part of the Western canon. It is among the most frequently taught works of French literature. Martin Seymour-Smith listed \"Candide\" as one of the 100 most influential books ever written.\nHistorical and literary background.\nSeveral historical events inspired Voltaire to write \"Candide\", most notably the publication of Leibniz's \"Monadology\", the Seven Years' War, and the 1755 Lisbon earthquake. Both of the latter catastrophes are frequently referred to in \"Candide\". The earthquake, tsunami, and resulting fires of All Saints' Day had a strong influence on theologians of the day and on Voltaire, who was himself disillusioned by them. It had an especially large effect on the contemporary doctrine of optimism, a philosophical system founded on the theodicy of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, which insisted on God's benevolence in spite of such events. This concept is often put in the form, \"all is for the best in the best of all possible worlds\" (). Philosophers had trouble fitting the horrors of this earthquake into their optimistic world view.\nVoltaire actively rejected Leibnizian optimism after the natural disaster, convinced that if this were the best possible world, it should surely be better than it is. In both \"Candide\" and (\"Poem on the Lisbon Disaster\"), Voltaire attacks this optimist belief, sarcastically describing the catastrophe as one of the most horrible disasters \"in the best of all possible worlds\". Immediately after the earthquake, unreliable rumours circulated around Europe, sometimes overestimating the severity of the event. Ira Wade, a noted expert on Voltaire and \"Candide\", has analyzed which sources Voltaire might have referenced. speculating that Voltaire's primary source was the 1755 work by Ange Goudar.\nApart from such events, contemporaneous stereotypes of the German personality may have been a source of inspiration for the text, as they were for , a 1669 satirical picaresque novel written by Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen and inspired by the Thirty Years' War. The protagonist of this novel, supposed to embody stereotypically German characteristics, is quite similar to the protagonist of \"Candide\". These stereotypes, according to Voltaire biographer Alfred Owen Aldridge, include \"extreme credulousness or sentimental simplicity\", two of Candide's and Simplicius's defining qualities. Aldridge writes, \"Since Voltaire admitted familiarity with fifteenth-century German authors who used a bold and buffoonish style, it is quite possible that he knew as well.\"\nA satirical and parodic precursor of \"Candide\", Jonathan Swift's \"Gulliver's Travels\" (1726) is one of \"Candide\"s closest literary relatives. This satire tells the story of \"a gullible ingenue\", Gulliver, who (like Candide) travels to several \"remote nations\" and is hardened by the many misfortunes which befall him. As evidenced by similarities between the two books, Voltaire probably drew upon \"Gulliver's Travels\" for inspiration while writing \"Candide\". Other probable sources of inspiration for \"Candide\" are (1699) by Fran\u00e7ois F\u00e9nelon and (1753) by Louis-Charles Fougeret de Monbron. \"Candide\"s parody of the bildungsroman is probably based on , which includes the prototypical parody of the tutor on whom Pangloss may have been partly based. Likewise, Monbron's protagonist undergoes a disillusioning series of travels similar to those of Candide.\nCreation.\nBy the time of the Lisbon earthquake, Voltaire was already a well-established author. \"Candide\" became part of his large, diverse body of philosophical, political, and artistic works expressing these views. It became a model for the eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century novels called the \"contes philosophiques\". This genre included previous works of his such as \"Zadig\" and \"Micromegas\".\nIt is unknown exactly when Voltaire wrote \"Candide.\" Scholars estimate that it was primarily composed in late 1758 and begun as early as 1757. Voltaire is believed to have written a portion of it while living at Les D\u00e9lices near Geneva and also while visiting Charles Th\u00e9odore, the Elector-Palatinate, at Schwetzingen for three weeks in the summer of 1758. Despite solid evidence for these claims, a popular legend persists that he wrote \"Candide\" in three days. This idea is probably based on a misreading of the 1885 work by Lucien Pereyand Gaston Maugras. \nThere is only one extant manuscript of \"Candide\" that was written before the work's 1759 publication, discovered in 1956 by Wade and since named the \"La Valli\u00e8re Manuscript\". It is believed to have been sent, chapter by chapter, by Voltaire to the Duke and Duchess La Valli\u00e8re in the autumn of 1758. The manuscript was sold to the Biblioth\u00e8que de l'Arsenal in the late eighteenth century, where it remained undiscovered for almost two hundred years. The \"La Valli\u00e8re Manuscript\", the most original and authentic of all surviving copies of \"Candide\", was probably dictated by Voltaire to his secretary, Jean-Louis Wagni\u00e8re, then edited directly. In addition to this manuscript, there is believed to have been another, one copied by Wagni\u00e8re for the Elector Charles-Th\u00e9odore, who hosted Voltaire during the summer of 1758. The existence of this copy was first postulated by Norman L. Torrey in 1929. If it exists, it remains undiscovered.\nVoltaire published \"Candide\" simultaneously in five countries no later than 15 January 1759, although the exact date is uncertain. Seventeen versions of \"Candide\" from 1759, in the original French, are known today, and there has been great controversy over which is the earliest. More versions were published in other languages: \"Candide\" was translated once into Italian and thrice into English that same year. The complicated science of calculating the relative publication dates of all of the versions of \"Candide\" is described at length in Wade's article \"The First Edition of \"Candide\": A Problem of Identification\". The publication process was extremely secretive, probably the \"most clandestine work of the century\", because of the book's obviously illicit and irreverent content. The greatest number of copies of \"Candide\" were published concurrently in Geneva by Cramer, in Amsterdam by Marc-Michel Rey, in London by Jean Nourse, and in Paris by Lambert.\n\"Candide\" underwent one major revision after its initial publication, in addition to some minor ones. In 1761, a version of \"Candide\" was published that included, along with several minor changes, a major addition by Voltaire to the twenty-second chapter, a section that had been thought weak by the Duke of Valli\u00e8re. The English title of this edition was \"Candide, or Optimism, Translated from the German of Dr. Ralph. With the additions found in the Doctor's pocket when he died at Minden, in the Year of Grace 1759.\" The last edition of \"Candide\" authorised by Voltaire was the one included in Cramer's 1775 edition of his complete works, known as , in reference to the border or frame around each page.\nVoltaire strongly opposed the inclusion of illustrations in his works, as he stated in a 1778 letter to the writer and publisher Charles Joseph Panckoucke:\nDespite this protest, two sets of illustrations for \"Candide\" were produced by the French artist Jean-Michel Moreau le Jeune. The first version was done, at Moreau's own expense, in 1787 and included in Kehl's publication of that year, \"Oeuvres Compl\u00e8tes de Voltaire\". Four images were drawn by Moreau for this edition and were engraved by Pierre-Charles Baquoy. The second version, in 1803, consisted of seven drawings by Moreau which were transposed by multiple engravers. The twentieth-century modern artist Paul Klee stated that it was while reading \"Candide\" that he discovered his own artistic style. Klee illustrated the work, and his drawings were published in a 1920 version edited by Kurt Wolff.\nSynopsis.\n\"Candide\" contains thirty episodic chapters, which may be grouped into two main schemes: one consists of two divisions, separated by the protagonist's hiatus in El Dorado; the other consists of three parts, each defined by its geographical setting. By the former scheme, the first half of \"Candide\" constitutes the rising action and the last part the resolution. This view is supported by the strong theme of travel and quest, reminiscent of adventure and picaresque novels, which tend to employ such a dramatic structure. By the latter scheme, the thirty chapters may be grouped into three parts each comprising ten chapters and defined by locale: I\u2013X are set in Europe, XI\u2013XX are set in the Americas, and XXI\u2013XXX are set in Europe and the Ottoman Empire. The plot summary that follows uses this second format and includes Voltaire's additions of 1761.\nChapters I\u2013X.\nThe tale of \"Candide\" begins in the castle of the Baron Thunder-ten-Tronckh in Westphalia, home to the Baron's daughter, Lady Cun\u00e9gonde; his bastard nephew, Candide; a tutor, Pangloss; a chambermaid, Paquette; and the rest of the Baron's family. The protagonist, Candide, is romantically attracted to Cun\u00e9gonde. He is a young man of \"the most unaffected simplicity\" (), whose face is \"the true index of his mind\" (). Dr. Pangloss, professor of \"\" (English: \"metaphysico-theologo-cosmolonigology\") and self-proclaimed optimist, teaches his pupils that they live in the \"best of all possible worlds\" and that \"all is for the best\".\nAll is well in the castle until Cun\u00e9gonde sees Pangloss sexually engaged with Paquette in some bushes. Encouraged by this show of affection, Cun\u00e9gonde drops her handkerchief next to Candide, enticing him to kiss her. For this infraction, Candide is evicted from the castle, at which point he is captured by Bulgar (Prussian) recruiters and coerced into military service, where he is flogged, nearly executed, and forced to participate in a major battle between the Bulgars and the Avars (an allegory representing the Prussians and the French). Candide eventually escapes the army and makes his way to Holland where he is given aid by Jacques, an Anabaptist, who strengthens Candide's optimism. Soon after, Candide finds his master Pangloss, now a beggar with syphilis. Pangloss reveals he was infected with this disease by Paquette and shocks Candide by relating how Castle Thunder-ten-Tronckh was destroyed by Bulgars, that Cun\u00e9gonde and her whole family were killed, and that Cun\u00e9gonde was raped before her death. Pangloss is cured of his illness by Jacques, losing one eye and one ear in the process, and the three set sail to Lisbon.\nIn Lisbon's harbor, they are overtaken by a vicious storm which destroys the boat. Jacques attempts to save a sailor, and in the process is thrown overboard. The sailor makes no move to help the drowning Jacques, and Candide is in a state of despair until Pangloss explains to him that Lisbon harbor was created in order for Jacques to drown. Only Pangloss, Candide, and the \"brutish sailor\" who let Jacques drown survive the wreck and reach Lisbon, which is promptly hit by an earthquake, tsunami, and fire that kill tens of thousands. The sailor leaves in order to loot the rubble while Candide, injured and begging for help, is lectured on the optimistic view of the situation by Pangloss.\nThe next day, Pangloss discusses his optimistic philosophy with a member of the Portuguese Inquisition, and he and Candide are arrested for heresy, set to be tortured and killed in an \" set up to appease God and prevent another disaster. Candide is flogged and sees Pangloss hanged, but another earthquake intervenes and he escapes. He is approached by an old woman, who leads him to a house where Lady Cun\u00e9gonde waits, alive. Candide is surprised: Pangloss had told him that Cun\u00e9gonde had been raped and disemboweled. She had been, but Cun\u00e9gonde points out that people survive such things. However, her rescuer sold her to a Jewish merchant, Don Issachar, who was then threatened by a corrupt Grand Inquisitor into sharing her (Don Issachar gets Cun\u00e9gonde on Mondays, Wednesdays, and the sabbath day). Her owners arrive, find her with another man, and Candide kills them both. Candide and the two women flee the city, heading to the Americas. Along the way, Cun\u00e9gonde falls into self-pity, complaining of all the misfortunes that have befallen her.\nChapters XI\u2013XX.\nThe old woman reciprocates by revealing her own tragic life: born the daughter of Pope Urban X and the Princess of Palestrina, she was kidnapped and enslaved by Barbary pirates, witnessed violent civil wars in Morocco under the bloodthirsty king Moulay Isma\u00efl (during which her mother was drawn and quartered), suffered constant hunger, nearly died from a plague in Algiers, and had a buttock cut off to feed starving Janissaries during the Russian capture of Azov. After traversing all the Russian Empire, she eventually became a servant of Don Issachar and met Cun\u00e9gonde.\nThe trio arrives in Buenos Aires, where Governor Don Fernando d'Ibarra y Figueroa y Mascarenes y Lampourdos y Souza asks to marry Cun\u00e9gonde. Just then, an \"alcalde\" (a Spanish magistrate) arrives, pursuing Candide for killing the Grand Inquisitor. Leaving the women behind, Candide flees to Paraguay with his practical and heretofore unmentioned manservant, Cacambo.\nAt a border post on the way to Paraguay, Cacambo and Candide speak to the commandant, who turns out to be Cun\u00e9gonde's unnamed brother. He explains that after his family was slaughtered, the Jesuits' preparation for his burial revived him, and he has since joined the order. When Candide proclaims he intends to marry Cun\u00e9gonde, her brother attacks him, and Candide runs him through with his rapier. After lamenting all the people (mainly priests) he has killed, he and Cacambo flee. In their flight, Candide and Cacambo come across two naked women being chased and bitten by a pair of monkeys. Candide, seeking to protect the women, shoots and kills the monkeys, but is informed by Cacambo that the monkeys and women were probably lovers.\nCacambo and Candide are captured by Oreillons, or Orejones; members of the Inca nobility who widened the lobes of their ears, and are depicted here as the fictional inhabitants of the area. Mistaking Candide for a Jesuit by his robes, the Oreillons prepare to cook Candide and Cacambo; however, Cacambo convinces the Oreillons that Candide killed a Jesuit to procure the robe. Cacambo and Candide are released and travel for a month on foot and then down a river by canoe, living on fruits and berries.\nAfter a few more adventures, Candide and Cacambo wander into El Dorado, a geographically isolated utopia where the streets are covered with precious stones, there exist no priests, and all of the king's jokes are funny. Candide and Cacambo stay a month in El Dorado, but Candide is still in pain without Cun\u00e9gonde, and expresses to the king his wish to leave. The king points out that this is a foolish idea, but generously helps them do so. The pair continue their journey, now accompanied by one hundred red pack sheep carrying provisions and incredible sums of money, which they slowly lose or have stolen over the next few adventures.\nCandide and Cacambo eventually reach Suriname where they split up: Cacambo travels to Buenos Aires to retrieve Lady Cun\u00e9gonde, while Candide prepares to travel to Europe to await the two. Candide's remaining sheep are stolen, and Candide is fined heavily by a Dutch magistrate for petulance over the theft. Before leaving Suriname, Candide feels in need of companionship, so he interviews a number of local men who have been through various ill-fortunes and settles on a man named Martin.\nChapters XXI\u2013XXX.\nThis companion, Martin, is a Manichaean scholar based on the real-life pessimist Pierre Bayle, who was a chief opponent of Leibniz. For the remainder of the voyage, Martin and Candide argue about philosophy, Martin painting the entire world as occupied by fools. Candide, however, remains an optimist at heart, since it is all he knows. After a detour to Bordeaux and Paris, they arrive in England and see an admiral (based on Admiral Byng) being shot for not killing enough of the enemy. Martin explains that Britain finds it necessary to shoot an admiral from time to time \"pour encourager les autres\" (to encourage the others). Candide, horrified, arranges for them to leave Britain immediately. Upon their arrival in Venice, Candide and Martin meet Paquette, the chambermaid who infected Pangloss with his syphilis. She is now a prostitute, and is spending her time with a Theatine monk, Brother Girofl\u00e9e. Although both appear happy on the surface, they reveal their despair: Paquette has led a miserable existence as a sexual object since she was forced to become a prostitute, and the monk detests the religious order in which he was indoctrinated. Candide gives two thousand piastres to Paquette and one thousand to Brother Girofl\u00e9e.\nCandide and Martin visit the Lord Pococurante, a noble Venetian. That evening, Cacambo\u2014now a slave\u2014arrives and informs Candide that Cun\u00e9gonde is in Constantinople. Prior to their departure, Candide and Martin dine with six strangers who had come for the Carnival of Venice. These strangers are revealed to be dethroned kings: the Ottoman Sultan Ahmed III, Emperor Ivan VI of Russia, Charles Edward Stuart (an unsuccessful pretender to the English throne), Augustus III of Poland (deprived, at the time of writing, of his reign in the Electorate of Saxony due to the Seven Years' War), Stanis\u0142aw Leszczy\u0144ski, and Theodore of Corsica.\nOn the way to Constantinople, Cacambo reveals that Cun\u00e9gonde\u2014now horribly ugly\u2014currently washes dishes on the banks of the Propontis as a slave for a fugitive Transylvanian prince by the name of R\u00e1k\u00f3czi. After arriving at the Bosphorus, they board a galley where, to Candide's surprise, he finds Pangloss and Cun\u00e9gonde's brother among the rowers. Candide buys their freedom and further passage at steep prices. They both relate how they survived, but despite the horrors he has been through, Pangloss's optimism remains unshaken: \"I still hold to my original opinions, because, after all, I'm a philosopher, and it wouldn't be proper for me to recant, since Leibniz cannot be wrong, and since pre-established harmony is the most beautiful thing in the world, along with the plenum and subtle matter.\"\nCandide, the baron, Pangloss, Martin, and Cacambo arrive at the banks of the Propontis, where they rejoin Cun\u00e9gonde and the old woman. Cun\u00e9gonde has indeed become hideously ugly, but Candide nevertheless buys their freedom and marries Cun\u00e9gonde to spite her brother, who forbids Cun\u00e9gonde from marrying anyone but a baron of the Empire (he is secretly sold back into slavery). Paquette and Brother Girofl\u00e9e\u2014having squandered their three thousand piastres\u2014are reconciled with Candide on a small farm () which he just bought with the last of his finances.\nOne day, the protagonists seek out a dervish known as a great philosopher of the land. Candide asks him why Man is made to suffer so, and what they all ought to do. The dervish responds by asking rhetorically why Candide is concerned about the existence of evil and good. The dervish describes human beings as mice on a ship sent by a king to Egypt; their comfort does not matter to the king. The dervish then slams his door on the group. Returning to their farm, Candide, Pangloss, and Martin meet a Turk whose philosophy is to devote his life only to simple work and not concern himself with external affairs. He and his four children cultivate a small area of land, and the work keeps them \"free of three great evils: boredom, vice, and poverty.\" Candide, Pangloss, Martin, Cun\u00e9gonde, Paquette, Cacambo, the old woman, and Brother Girofl\u00e9e all set to work on this \"commendable plan\" () on their farm, each exercising his or her own talents. Candide ignores Pangloss's insistence that all turned out for the best by necessity, instead telling him \"we must cultivate our garden\" ().\nStyle.\nAs Voltaire himself described it, the purpose of \"Candide\" was to \"bring amusement to a small number of men of wit\". The author achieves this goal by combining wit with a parody of the classic adventure-romance plot. Candide is confronted with horrible events described in painstaking detail so often that it becomes humorous. Literary theorist Frances K. Barasch described Voltaire's matter-of-fact narrative as treating topics such as mass death \"as coolly as a weather report\". The fast-paced and improbable plot\u2014in which characters narrowly escape death repeatedly, for instance\u2014allows for compounding tragedies to befall the same characters over and over again. In the end, \"Candide\" is primarily, as described by Voltaire's biographer Ian Davidson, \"short, light, rapid and humorous\".\nBehind the playful fa\u00e7ade of \"Candide\" which has amused so many, there lies very harsh criticism of contemporary European civilization which angered many others. European governments such as France, Prussia, Portugal and England are each attacked ruthlessly by the author: the French and Prussians for the Seven Years' War, the Portuguese for their Inquisition, and the British for the execution of John Byng. Organised religion, too, is harshly treated in \"Candide\". For example, Voltaire mocks the Jesuit order of the Roman Catholic Church. Aldridge provides a characteristic example of such anti-clerical passages for which the work was banned: while in Paraguay, Cacambo remarks, \"[The Jesuits] are masters of everything, and the people have no money at all\u00a0\u2026\". Here, Voltaire suggests the Christian mission in Paraguay is taking advantage of the local population. Voltaire depicts the Jesuits holding the indigenous peoples as slaves while they claim to be helping them.\nSatire.\nThe main method of \"Candide\"s satire is to contrast ironically great tragedy and comedy. The story does not invent or exaggerate evils of the world\u2014it displays real ones starkly, allowing Voltaire to simplify subtle philosophies and cultural traditions, highlighting their flaws. Thus \"Candide\" derides optimism, for instance, with a deluge of horrible, historical (or at least plausible) events with no apparent redeeming qualities.\nA simple example of the satire of \"Candide\" is seen in the treatment of the historic event witnessed by Candide and Martin in Portsmouth harbour. There, the duo spy an anonymous admiral, supposed to represent John Byng, being executed for failing to properly engage a French fleet. The admiral is blindfolded and shot on the deck of his own ship, merely \"to encourage the others\" (, an expression Voltaire is credited with originating). This depiction of military punishment trivializes Byng's death. The dry, pithy explanation \"to encourage the others\" thus satirises a serious historical event in characteristically Voltairian fashion. For its classic wit, this phrase has become one of the more often quoted from \"Candide\".\nVoltaire depicts the worst of the world and his pathetic hero's desperate effort to fit it into an optimistic outlook. Almost all of \"Candide\" is a discussion of various forms of evil: its characters rarely find even temporary respite. There is at least one notable exception: the episode of El Dorado, a fantastic village in which the inhabitants are simply rational, and their society is just and reasonable. The positivity of El Dorado may be contrasted with the pessimistic attitude of most of the book. Even in this case, the bliss of El Dorado is fleeting: Candide soon leaves the village to seek Cun\u00e9gonde, whom he eventually marries only out of a sense of obligation.\nAnother element of the satire focuses on what William F. Bottiglia, author of many published works on \"Candide\", calls the \"sentimental foibles of the age\" and Voltaire's attack on them. Flaws in European culture are highlighted as \"Candide\" parodies adventure and romance clich\u00e9s, mimicking the style of a picaresque novel. A number of archetypal characters thus have recognisable manifestations in Voltaire's work: Candide is supposed to be the drifting rogue of low social class, Cun\u00e9gonde the sex interest, Pangloss the knowledgeable mentor, and Cacambo the skillful valet. As the plot unfolds, readers find that Candide is no rogue, Cun\u00e9gonde becomes ugly and Pangloss is a stubborn fool. The characters of \"Candide\" are unrealistic, two-dimensional, mechanical, and even marionette-like; they are simplistic and stereotypical. As the initially na\u00efve protagonist eventually comes to a mature conclusion\u2014however noncommittal\u2014the novella is a \"bildungsroman\", if not a very serious one.\nGarden motif.\nGardens are thought by many critics to play a critical symbolic role in \"Candide\". The first location commonly identified as a garden is the castle of the Baron, from which Candide and Cun\u00e9gonde are evicted much in the same fashion as Adam and Eve are evicted from the Garden of Eden in the Book of Genesis. Cyclically, the main characters of \"Candide\" conclude the novel in a garden of their own making, one which might represent celestial paradise. The third most prominent \"garden\" is El Dorado, which may be a false Eden. Other possibly symbolic gardens include the Jesuit pavilion, the garden of Pococurante, Cacambo's garden, and the Turk's garden.\nThese gardens are probably references to the Garden of Eden, but it has also been proposed, by Bottiglia, for example, that the gardens refer also to the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\", and that Candide's conclusion to cultivate \"his garden\" symbolises Voltaire's great support for this endeavour. Candide and his companions, as they find themselves at the end of the novella, are in a very similar position to Voltaire's tightly knit philosophical circle which supported the : the main characters of \"Candide\" live in seclusion to \"cultivate [their] garden\", just as Voltaire suggested his colleagues leave society to write. In addition, there is evidence in the epistolary correspondence of Voltaire that he had elsewhere used the metaphor of gardening to describe writing the . Another interpretative possibility is that Candide cultivating \"his garden\" suggests his engaging in only necessary occupations, such as feeding oneself and fighting boredom. This is analogous to Voltaire's own view on gardening: he was himself a gardener at his estates in Les D\u00e9lices and Ferney, and he often wrote in his correspondence that gardening was an important pastime of his own, it being an extraordinarily effective way to keep busy.\nPhilosophy.\nOptimism.\n\"Candide\" satirises various philosophical and religious theories that Voltaire had previously criticised. Primary among these is Leibnizian optimism (sometimes called \"Panglossianism\" after its fictional proponent), which Voltaire ridicules with descriptions of seemingly endless calamity. Voltaire demonstrates a variety of irredeemable evils in the world, leading many critics to contend that Voltaire's treatment of evil\u2014specifically the theological problem of\nits existence\u2014is the focus of the work. Heavily referenced in the text are the Lisbon earthquake, disease, and the sinking of ships in storms. Also, war, thievery, and murder\u2014evils of human design\u2014are explored as extensively in \"Candide\" as are environmental ills. Bottiglia notes Voltaire is \"comprehensive\" in his enumeration of the world's evils. He is unrelenting in attacking Leibnizian optimism.\nFundamental to Voltaire's attack is Candide's tutor Pangloss, a self-proclaimed follower of Leibniz and a teacher of his doctrine. Ridicule of Pangloss's theories thus ridicules Leibniz himself, and Pangloss's reasoning is silly at best. For example, Pangloss's first teachings of the narrative absurdly mix up cause and effect:\nFollowing such flawed reasoning even more doggedly than Candide, Pangloss defends optimism. Whatever their horrendous fortune, Pangloss reiterates \"all is for the best\" (\"\") and proceeds to \"justify\" the evil event's occurrence. A characteristic example of such theodicy is found in Pangloss's explanation of why it is good that syphilis exists:\nCandide, the impressionable and incompetent student of Pangloss, often tries to justify evil, fails, invokes his mentor and eventually despairs. It is by these failures that Candide is painfully cured (as Voltaire would see it) of his optimism.\nThis critique of Voltaire's seems to be directed almost exclusively at Leibnizian optimism. \"Candide\" does not ridicule Voltaire's contemporary Alexander Pope, a later optimist of slightly different convictions. \"Candide\" does not discuss Pope's optimistic principle that \"all is right\", but Leibniz's that states, \"this is the best of all possible worlds\". However subtle the difference between the two, \"Candide\" is unambiguous as to which is its subject. Some critics conjecture that Voltaire meant to spare Pope this ridicule out of respect, although Voltaire's \"Po\u00e8me\" may have been written as a more direct response to Pope's theories. This work is similar to \"Candide\" in subject matter, but very different from it in style: the \"Po\u00e8me\" embodies a more serious philosophical argument than \"Candide\".\nConclusion.\nThe conclusion of the novel, in which Candide finally dismisses his tutor's optimism, leaves unresolved what philosophy the protagonist is to accept in its stead. This element of \"Candide\" has been written about voluminously, perhaps above all others. The conclusion is enigmatic and its analysis is contentious.\nVoltaire develops no formal, systematic philosophy for the characters to adopt. The conclusion of the novel may be thought of not as a philosophical alternative to optimism, but as a prescribed practical outlook (though it prescribes is in dispute). Many critics have concluded that one minor character or another is portrayed as having the right philosophy. For instance, a number believe that Martin is treated sympathetically, and that his character holds Voltaire's ideal philosophy\u2014pessimism. Others disagree, citing Voltaire's negative descriptions of Martin's principles and the conclusion of the work in which Martin plays little part.\nWithin debates attempting to decipher the conclusion of \"Candide\" lies another primary \"Candide\" debate. This one concerns the degree to which Voltaire was advocating a pessimistic philosophy, by which Candide and his companions give up hope for a better world. Critics argue that the group's reclusion on the farm signifies Candide and his companions' loss of hope for the rest of the human race. This view is to be compared to a reading that presents Voltaire as advocating a melioristic philosophy and a precept committing the travellers to improving the world through metaphorical gardening. This debate, and others, focuses on the question of whether or not Voltaire was prescribing passive retreat from society, or active industrious contribution to it.\nInside vs. outside interpretations.\nSeparate from the debate about the text's conclusion is the \"inside/outside\" controversy. This argument centers on the matter of whether or not Voltaire was actually prescribing anything. Roy Wolper, professor emeritus of English, argues in a revolutionary 1969 paper that \"Candide\" does not necessarily speak for its author; that the work should be viewed as a narrative independent of Voltaire's history; and that its message is entirely (or mostly) it. This point of view, the \"inside\", specifically rejects attempts to find Voltaire's \"voice\" in the many characters of \"Candide\" and his other works. Indeed, writers have seen Voltaire as speaking through at least Candide, Martin, and the Turk. Wolper argues that \"Candide\" should be read with a minimum of speculation as to its meaning in Voltaire's personal life. His article ushered in a new era of Voltaire studies, causing many scholars to look at the novel differently. \nCritics such as Lester Crocker, Henry Stavan, and Vivienne Mylne find too many similarities between \"Candide\"s point of view and that of Voltaire to accept the \"inside\" view; they support the \"outside\" interpretation. They believe that Candide's final decision is the same as Voltaire's, and see a strong connection between the development of the protagonist and his author. Some scholars who support the \"outside\" view also believe that the isolationist philosophy of the Old Turk closely mirrors that of Voltaire. Others see a strong parallel between Candide's gardening at the conclusion and the gardening of the author. Martine Darmon Meyer argues that the \"inside\" view fails to see the satirical work in context, and that denying that \"Candide\" is primarily a mockery of optimism (a matter of historical context) is a \"very basic betrayal of the text\".\nReception.\nThough Voltaire did not openly admit to having written the controversial \"Candide\" until 1768 (until then he signed with a pseudonym: \"Monsieur le docteur Ralph\", or \"Doctor Ralph\"), his authorship of the work was hardly disputed.\nImmediately after publication, the work and its author were denounced by both secular and religious authorities, because the book openly derides government and church alike. It was because of such polemics that Omer-Louis-Fran\u00e7ois Joly de Fleury, who was Advocate General to the Parisian parliament when \"Candide\" was published, found parts of \"Candide\" to be \"contrary to religion and morals\".\nDespite much official indictment, soon after its publication, \"Candide\"s irreverent prose was being quoted. \"Let us eat a Jesuit\", for instance, became a popular phrase for its reference to a humorous passage in \"Candide\". By the end of February 1759, the Grand Council of Geneva and the administrators of Paris had banned \"Candide\". \"Candide\" nevertheless succeeded in selling twenty thousand to thirty thousand copies by the end of the year in more than twenty editions, making it a best seller. The Duke de La Valli\u00e8re speculated near the end of January 1759 that \"Candide\" might have been the fastest-selling book ever. In 1762, \"Candide\" was listed in the \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum\", the Roman Catholic Church's list of prohibited books.\nBannings of \"Candide\" lasted into the twentieth century in the United States, where it has long been considered a seminal work of Western literature. At least once, \"Candide\" was temporarily barred from entering America: in February 1929, a US customs official in Boston prevented a number of copies of the book, deemed \"obscene\", from reaching a Harvard University French class. \"Candide\" was admitted in August of the same year; however by that time the class was over. In an interview soon after \"Candide\"s detention, the official who confiscated the book explained the office's decision to ban it, \"But about 'Candide,' I'll tell you. For years we've been letting that book get by. There were so many different editions, all sizes and kinds, some illustrated and some plain, that we figured the book must be all right. Then one of us happened to read it. It's a filthy book\".\nLegacy.\n\"Candide\" is the most widely read of Voltaire's many works, and it is considered one of the great achievements of Western literature. William F. Bottiglia opines, \"The physical size of \"Candide\", as well as Voltaire's attitude toward his fiction, precludes the achievement of artistic dimension through plenitude, autonomous '3D' vitality, emotional resonance, or poetic exaltation. \"Candide\", then, cannot in quantity or quality, measure up to the supreme classics\" such as the works of Homer or Shakespeare, Sophocles, Chaucer, Dante, Cervantes, Fielding, Goethe, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Racine, or Moli\u00e8re. Bottiglia instead calls it a miniature classic; but others have been more forgiving of its size. As the only work of Voltaire which has remained popular up to the present day, \"Candide\" is listed in Harold Bloom's \"\". It is included in the Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica collection \"Great Books of the Western World\". \"Candide\" has influenced modern writers of black humour such as C\u00e9line, Joseph Heller, John Barth, Thomas Pynchon, Kurt Vonnegut, and Terry Southern. Its parody and picaresque methods have become favourites of black humorists.\nCharles Brockden Brown, an early American novelist, may have been directly affected by Voltaire, whose work he knew well. Mark Kamrath, professor of English, describes the strength of the connection between \"Candide\" and Brown's \"Edgar Huntly; or, Memoirs of a Sleep-Walker\" (1799): \"An unusually large number of parallels...crop up in the two novels, particularly in terms of characters and plot.\" For instance, the protagonists of both novels are romantically involved with a recently orphaned young woman. Furthermore, in both works the brothers of the female lovers are Jesuits, and each is murdered (although under different circumstances). \nSome twentieth-century novels that may have been influenced by \"Candide\" are some dystopian science-fiction works. Armand Mattelart, a French critic, sees \"Candide\" in Aldous Huxley's \"Brave New World\", George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", and Yevgeny Zamyatin's \"We\", three canonical works of the genre. Specifically, Mattelart writes that in each of these works, there exist references to \"Candide\"s popularisation of the phrase \"the best of all possible worlds\". He cites as evidence, for example, that the French version of \"Brave New World\" was entitled ().\nReaders of \"Candide\" often compare it with certain works of the modern genre the Theatre of the Absurd. Haydn Mason, a Voltaire scholar, sees in \"Candide\" a few similarities to this brand of literature. For instance, he notes commonalities of \"Candide\" and \"Waiting for Godot\" (1952). In both of these works, and in a similar manner, friendship provides emotional support for characters when they are confronted with harshness of their existences. However, Mason qualifies, \"the must not be seen as a forerunner of the 'absurd' in modern fiction. Candide's world has many ridiculous and meaningless elements, but human beings are not totally deprived of the ability to make sense out of it.\" John Pilling, biographer of Beckett, does state that \"Candide\" was an early and powerful influence on Beckett's thinking. Rosa Luxemburg, in the aftermath of the First World War, remarked upon re-reading \"Candide\": \"Before the war, I would have thought this wicked compilation of all human misery a caricature. Now it strikes me as altogether realistic.\"\nThe American alternative rock band Bloodhound Gang refer to \"Candide\" in their song \"Take the Long Way Home\", from the American edition of their 1999 album \"Hooray for Boobies\".\nDerivative works.\nIn 1760, one year after Voltaire published \"Candide\", a sequel was published with the name . This work is attributed both to Thorel de Campigneulles, a writer unknown today, and Henri Joseph Du Laurens, who is suspected of having habitually plagiarised Voltaire. The story continues in this sequel with Candide having new adventures in the Ottoman Empire, Persia, and Denmark. \"Part II\" has potential use in studies of the popular and literary receptions of \"Candide\", but is almost certainly apocryphal. In total, by the year 1803, at least ten imitations of \"Candide\" or continuations of its story were published by authors other than Voltaire.\n\"Candide\" was adapted for the radio anthology program \"On Stage\" in 1953. Richard Chandlee wrote the script; Elliott Lewis, Cathy Lewis, Edgar Barrier, Byron Kane, Jack Kruschen, Howard McNear, Larry Thor, Martha Wentworth, and Ben Wright performed.\nThe operetta \"Candide\" was originally conceived by playwright Lillian Hellman, as a play with incidental music. Leonard Bernstein, the American composer and conductor who wrote the music, was so excited about the project that he convinced Hellman to do it as a \"comic operetta\". Many lyricists worked on the show, including James Agee, Dorothy Parker, John Latouche, Richard Wilbur, Leonard and Felicia Bernstein, and Hellman. Hershy Kay orchestrated all the pieces except for the overture, which Bernstein did himself. \"Candide\" first opened on Broadway as a musical on 1 December 1956. The premier production was directed by Tyrone Guthrie and conducted by Samuel Krachmalnick. While this production was a box office flop, the music was highly praised, and an original cast album was made. The album gradually became a cult hit, but Hellman's libretto was criticised as being too serious an adaptation of Voltaire's novel. \"Candide\" has been revised and reworked several times. The first New York revival, directed by Hal Prince, featured an entirely new libretto by Hugh Wheeler and additional lyrics by Stephen Sondheim. Bernstein revised the work again in 1987 with the collaboration of John Mauceri and John Wells. After Bernstein's death, further revised productions of the musical were performed in versions prepared by Trevor Nunn and John Caird in 1999, and Mary Zimmerman in 2010.\nThe BBC produced a television adaptation in 1973, with Ian Ogilvy as Candide, Emrys James as Dr. Pangloss, and Frank Finlay as Voltaire himself, acting as the narrator.\n\"\" (1977) or simply is a book by Leonardo Sciascia. It was at least partly based on Voltaire's \"Candide\", although the actual influence of \"Candide\" on is a hotly debated topic. A number of theories on the matter have been proposed. Proponents of one say that is very similar to \"Candide\", only with a happy ending; supporters of another claim that Voltaire provided Sciascia with only a starting point from which to work, that the two books are quite distinct.\nNedim G\u00fcrsel wrote his 2001 novel \"Le voyage de Candide \u00e0 Istanbul\" about a minor passage in \"Candide\" during which its protagonist meets Ahmed III, the deposed Turkish sultan. This chance meeting on a ship from Venice to Istanbul is the setting of G\u00fcrsel's book. Terry Southern, in writing his popular novel \"Candy\" with Mason Hoffenberg adapted \"Candide\" for a modern audience and changed the protagonist from male to female. \"Candy\" deals with the rejection of a sort of optimism which the author sees in women's magazines of the modern era; \"Candy\" also parodies pornography and popular psychology. This adaptation of \"Candide\" was adapted for the cinema by director Christian Marquand in 1968.\nIn addition to the above, \"Candide\" was made into a number of minor films and theatrical adaptations throughout the twentieth century. For a list of these, see (1989) with preface and commentaries by Pierre Malandain.\nIn May 2009, a play titled \"Optimism\", based on \"Candide\", opened at the CUB Malthouse Theatre in Melbourne. It followed the basic story of \"Candide\", incorporating anachronisms, music, and stand up comedy from comedian Frank Woodley. It toured Australia and played at the Edinburgh International Festival. In 2010, the Icelandic writer \u00d3ttar M. Nor\u00f0fj\u00f6r\u00f0 published a rewriting and modernisation of \"Candide\", titled ."}
{"id": "6631", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6631", "title": "Bus (computing)", "text": "In computer architecture, a bus (historically also called a data highway or databus) is a communication system that transfers data between components inside a computer or between computers. It encompasses both hardware (e.g., wires, optical fiber) and software, including communication protocols. At its core, a bus is a shared physical pathway, typically composed of wires, traces on a circuit board, or busbars, that allows multiple devices to communicate. To prevent conflicts and ensure orderly data exchange, buses rely on a communication protocol to manage which device can transmit data at a given time.\nBuses are categorized based on their role, such as system buses (also known as internal buses, internal data buses, or memory buses) connecting the CPU and memory. Expansion buses, also called peripheral buses, extend the system to connect additional devices, including peripherals. Examples of widely used buses include PCI Express (PCIe) for high-speed internal connections and Universal Serial Bus (USB) for connecting external devices.\nModern buses utilize both parallel and serial communication, employing advanced encoding methods to maximize speed and efficiency. Features such as direct memory access (DMA) further enhance performance by allowing data transfers directly between devices and memory without requiring CPU intervention.\nAddress bus.\nAn \"address bus\" is a bus that is used to specify a physical address. When a processor or DMA-enabled device needs to read or write to a memory location, it specifies that memory location on the address bus (the value to be read or written is sent on the data bus). The width of the address bus determines the amount of memory a system can address. For example, a system with a \"32-bit\" address bus can address \"232\" (4,294,967,296) memory locations. If each memory location holds one byte, the addressable memory space is 4\u00a0GB.\nAddress multiplexing.\nEarly processors used a wire for each bit of the address width. For example, a 16-bit address bus had 16 physical wires making up the bus. As the buses became wider and lengthier, this approach became expensive in terms of the number of chip pins and board traces. Beginning with the Mostek 4096 DRAM, address multiplexing implemented with multiplexers became common. In a multiplexed address scheme, the address is sent in two equal parts on alternate bus cycles. This halves the number of address bus signals required to connect to the memory. For example, a 32-bit address bus can be implemented by using 16 lines and sending the first half of the memory address, immediately followed by the second half memory address.\nTypically two additional pins in the control busrow-address strobe (RAS) and column-address strobe (CAS)are used to tell the DRAM whether the address bus is currently sending the first half of the memory address or the second half.\nImplementation.\nAccessing an individual byte frequently requires reading or writing the full bus width (a word) at once. In these instances the least significant bits of the address bus may not even be implemented - it is instead the responsibility of the controlling device to isolate the individual byte required from the complete word transmitted. This is the case, for instance, with the VESA Local Bus which lacks the two least significant bits, limiting this bus to aligned 32-bit transfers.\nHistorically, there were also some examples of computers that were only able to address wordsword machines.\nMemory bus.\nThe \"memory bus\" is the bus that connects the main memory to the memory controller in computer systems. Originally, general-purpose buses like VMEbus and the S-100 bus were used, but to reduce latency, modern memory buses are designed to connect directly to DRAM chips, and thus are defined by chip standards bodies such as JEDEC. Examples are the various generations of SDRAM, and serial point-to-point buses like SLDRAM and RDRAM.\nImplementation details.\nBuses can be parallel buses, which carry data words in parallel on multiple wires, or serial buses, which carry data in bit-serial form. The addition of extra power and control connections, differential drivers, and data connections in each direction usually means that most serial buses have more conductors than the minimum of one used in 1-Wire and UNI/O. As data rates increase, the problems of timing skew, power consumption, electromagnetic interference and crosstalk across parallel buses become more and more difficult to circumvent. One partial solution to this problem has been to double pump the bus. Often, a serial bus can be operated at higher overall data rates than a parallel bus, despite having fewer electrical connections, because a serial bus inherently has no timing skew or crosstalk. USB, FireWire, and Serial ATA are examples of this. Multidrop connections do not work well for fast serial buses, so most modern serial buses use daisy-chain or hub designs.\nThe transition from parallel to serial buses was allowed by Moore's law which allowed for the incorporation of SerDes in integrated circuits which are used in computers.\nNetwork connections such as Ethernet are not generally regarded as buses, although the difference is largely conceptual rather than practical. An attribute generally used to characterize a bus is that power is provided by the bus for the connected hardware. This emphasizes the busbar origins of bus architecture as supplying switched or distributed power. This excludes, as buses, schemes such as serial RS-232, parallel Centronics, IEEE 1284 interfaces and Ethernet, since these devices also needed separate power supplies. Universal Serial Bus devices may use the bus supplied power, but often use a separate power source. This distinction is exemplified by a telephone system with a connected modem, where the RJ11 connection and associated modulated signalling scheme is not considered a bus, and is analogous to an Ethernet connection. A phone line connection scheme is not considered to be a bus with respect to signals, but the Central Office uses buses with cross-bar switches for connections between phones.\nHowever, this distinctionthat power is provided by the busis not the case in many avionic systems, where data connections such as ARINC 429, ARINC 629, MIL-STD-1553B (STANAG 3838), and EFABus (STANAG 3910) are commonly referred to as \"data buses\" or, sometimes, \"databuses\". Such avionic data buses are usually characterized by having several equipments or Line Replaceable Items/Units (LRI/LRUs) connected to a common, shared media. They may, as with ARINC 429, be simplex, i.e. have a single source LRI/LRU or, as with ARINC 629, MIL-STD-1553B, and STANAG 3910, be duplex, allow all the connected LRI/LRUs to act, at different times (half duplex), as transmitters and receivers of data.\nThe frequency or the speed of a bus is measured in Hz such as MHz and determines how many clock cycles there are per second; there can be one or more data transfers per clock cycle. If there is a single transfer per clock cycle it is known as Single Data Rate (SDR), and if there are two transfers per clock cycle it is known as Double Data Rate (DDR) although the use of signalling other than SDR is uncommon outside of RAM. An example of this is PCIe which uses SDR. Within each data transfer there can be multiple bits of data. This is described as the width of a bus which is the number of bits the bus can transfer per clock cycle and can be synonymous with the number of physical electrical conductors the bus has if each conductor transfers one bit at a time. The data rate in bits per second can be obtained by multiplying the number of bits per clock cycle times the frequency times the number of transfers per clock cycle. Alternatively a bus such as PCIe can use modulation or encoding such as PAM4 which groups 2 bits into symbols which are then transferred instead of the bits themselves, and allows for an increase in data transfer speed without increasing the frequency of the bus. The effective or real data transfer speed/rate may be lower due to the use of encoding that also allows for error correction such as 128/130b (b for bit) encoding. The data transfer speed is also known as the bandwidth.\nBus multiplexing.\nThe simplest system bus has completely separate input data lines, output data lines, and address lines.\nTo reduce cost, most microcomputers have a bidirectional data bus, re-using the same wires for input and output at different times.\nSome processors use a dedicated wire for each bit of the address bus, data bus, and the control bus.\nFor example, the 64-pin STEbus is composed of 8 physical wires dedicated to the 8-bit data bus, 20 physical wires dedicated to the 20-bit address bus, 21 physical wires dedicated to the control bus, and 15 physical wires dedicated to various power buses.\nBus multiplexing requires fewer wires, which reduces costs in many early microprocessors and DRAM chips.\nOne common multiplexing scheme, address multiplexing, has already been mentioned.\nAnother multiplexing scheme re-uses the address bus pins as the data bus pins, an approach used by conventional PCI and the 8086.\nThe various \"serial buses\" can be seen as the ultimate limit of multiplexing, sending each of the address bits and each of the data bits, one at a time, through a single pin (or a single differential pair).\nHistory.\nOver time, several groups of people worked on various computer bus standards, including the IEEE Bus Architecture Standards Committee (BASC), the IEEE \"Superbus\" study group, the open microprocessor initiative (OMI), the open microsystems initiative (OMI), the \"Gang of Nine\" that developed EISA, etc.\nFirst generation.\nEarly computer buses were bundles of wire that attached computer memory and peripherals. Anecdotally termed the \"digit trunk\" in the early Australian CSIRAC computer, they were named after electrical power buses, or busbars. Almost always, there was one bus for memory, and one or more separate buses for peripherals. These were accessed by separate instructions, with completely different timings and protocols.\nOne of the first complications was the use of interrupts. Early computer programs performed I/O by waiting in a loop for the peripheral to become ready. This was a waste of time for programs that had other tasks to do. Also, if the program attempted to perform those other tasks, it might take too long for the program to check again, resulting in loss of data. Engineers thus arranged for the peripherals to interrupt the CPU. The interrupts had to be prioritized, because the CPU can only execute code for one peripheral at a time, and some devices are more time-critical than others.\nHigh-end systems introduced the idea of channel controllers, which were essentially small computers dedicated to handling the input and output of a given bus. IBM introduced these on the IBM 709 in 1958, and they became a common feature of their platforms. Other high-performance vendors like Control Data Corporation implemented similar designs. Generally, the channel controllers would do their best to run all of the bus operations internally, moving data when the CPU was known to be busy elsewhere if possible, and only using interrupts when necessary. This greatly reduced CPU load, and provided better overall system performance.\nTo provide modularity, memory and I/O buses can be combined into a unified system bus. In this case, a single mechanical and electrical system can be used to connect together many of the system components, or in some cases, all of them.\nLater computer programs began to share memory common to several CPUs. Access to this memory bus had to be prioritized, as well. The simple way to prioritize interrupts or bus access was with a daisy chain. In this case signals will naturally flow through the bus in physical or logical order, eliminating the need for complex scheduling.\nMinis and micros.\nDigital Equipment Corporation (DEC) further reduced cost for mass-produced minicomputers, and mapped peripherals into the memory bus, so that the input and output devices appeared to be memory locations. This was implemented in the Unibus of the PDP-11 around 1969.\nEarly microcomputer bus systems were essentially a passive backplane connected directly or through buffer amplifiers to the pins of the CPU. Memory and other devices would be added to the bus using the same address and data pins as the CPU itself used, connected in parallel. Communication was controlled by the CPU, which read and wrote data from the devices as if they are blocks of memory, using the same instructions, all timed by a central clock controlling the speed of the CPU. Still, devices interrupted the CPU by signaling on separate CPU pins.\nFor instance, a disk drive controller would signal the CPU that new data was ready to be read, at which point the CPU would move the data by reading the \"memory location\" that corresponded to the disk drive. Almost all early microcomputers were built in this fashion, starting with the S-100 bus in the Altair 8800 computer system.\nIn some instances, most notably in the IBM PC, although similar physical architecture can be employed, instructions to access peripherals (codice_1 and codice_2) and memory (codice_3 and others) have not been made uniform at all, and still generate distinct CPU signals, that could be used to implement a separate I/O bus.\nThese simple bus systems had a serious drawback when used for general-purpose computers. All the equipment on the bus had to talk at the same speed, as it shared a single clock.\nIncreasing the speed of the CPU becomes harder, because the speed of all the devices must increase as well. When it is not practical or economical to have all devices as fast as the CPU, the CPU must either enter a wait state, or work at a slower clock frequency temporarily, to talk to other devices in the computer. While acceptable in embedded systems, this problem was not tolerated for long in general-purpose, user-expandable computers.\nSuch bus systems are also difficult to configure when constructed from common off-the-shelf equipment. Typically each added expansion card requires many jumpers in order to set memory addresses, I/O addresses, interrupt priorities, and interrupt numbers.\nSecond generation.\n\"Second generation\" bus systems like NuBus addressed some of these problems. They typically separated the computer into two \"worlds\", the CPU and memory on one side, and the various devices on the other. A \"bus controller\" accepted data from the CPU side to be moved to the peripherals side, thus shifting the communications protocol burden from the CPU itself. This allowed the CPU and memory side to evolve separately from the device bus, or just \"bus\". Devices on the bus could talk to each other with no CPU intervention. This led to much better \"real world\" performance, but also required the cards to be much more complex. These buses also often addressed speed issues by being \"bigger\" in terms of the size of the data path, moving from 8-bit parallel buses in the first generation, to 16 or 32-bit in the second, as well as adding software setup (now standardised as Plug-n-play) to supplant or replace the jumpers.\nHowever, these newer systems shared one quality with their earlier cousins, in that everyone on the bus had to talk at the same speed. While the CPU was now isolated and could increase speed, CPUs and memory continued to increase in speed much faster than the buses they talked to. The result was that the bus speeds were now much slower than what a modern system needed, and the machines were left starved for data. A particularly common example of this problem was that video cards quickly outran even the newer bus systems like PCI, and computers began to include AGP just to drive the video card. By 2004 AGP was outgrown again by high-end video cards and other peripherals and has been replaced by the new PCI Express bus.\nAn increasing number of external devices started employing their own bus systems as well. When disk drives were first introduced, they would be added to the machine with a card plugged into the bus, which is why computers have so many slots on the bus. But through the 1980s and 1990s, new systems like SCSI and IDE were introduced to serve this need, leaving most slots in modern systems empty. Today there are likely to be about five different buses in the typical machine, supporting various devices.\nThird generation.\n\"Third generation\" buses have been emerging into the market since about 2001, including HyperTransport and InfiniBand. They also tend to be very flexible in terms of their physical connections, allowing them to be used both as internal buses, as well as connecting different machines together. This can lead to complex problems when trying to service different requests, so much of the work on these systems concerns software design, as opposed to the hardware itself. In general, these third generation buses tend to look more like a network than the original concept of a bus, with a higher protocol overhead needed than early systems, while also allowing multiple devices to use the bus at once.\nBuses such as Wishbone have been developed by the open source hardware movement in an attempt to further remove legal and patent constraints from computer design.\nThe Compute Express Link (CXL) is an open standard interconnect for high-speed CPU-to-device and CPU-to-memory, designed to accelerate next-generation data center performance.\nExamples of external computer buses.\nSerial.\nMany field buses are serial data buses (not to be confused with the parallel \"data bus\" section of a system bus or expansion card), several of which use the RS-485 electrical characteristics and then specify their own protocol and connector:\nOther serial buses include:"}
{"id": "6634", "revid": "46457109", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6634", "title": "Cadillac (disambiguation)", "text": "Cadillac is a General Motors luxury car brand.\nCadillac may also refer to:"}
{"id": "6635", "revid": "12931721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6635", "title": "Chinese checkers", "text": "Chinese checkers (US) or Chinese chequers (UK), known as Sternhalma in German, is a strategy board game of German origin that can be played by two, three, four, or six people, playing individually or with partners. The game is a modern and simplified variation of the game Halma.\nThe objective is to be first to race all of one's pieces across the hexagram-shaped board into \"home\"\u2014the corner of the star opposite one's starting corner\u2014using single-step moves or moves that over other pieces. The remaining players continue the game to establish second-, third-, fourth-, fifth-, and last-place finishers. \nHistory and nomenclature.\nThe game was invented in Germany in 1892 under the name \"Stern-Halma\" as a variation of the older American game Halma. The (German for \"star\") refers to the board's star shape (in contrast to the square board used in Halma). \nThe name \"Chinese checkers\" originated in the United States as a marketing scheme by Bill and Jack Pressman in 1928. The Pressman company's game was originally called \"Hop Ching checkers\". Like all Halma games, there's a similarity to checkers, but it did not originate in China nor any other part of Asia. \nThe game is known as () in Chinese. In Japan, the game has a variation called with slightly different rules.\nRules.\nThe aim is to race all one's pieces into the star corner on the opposite side of the board before the opponents do the same. The destination corner is called \"home\". Each player has 10 pieces, except in games between two players, when 15 pieces are used. (On bigger star boards, 15 or 21 pieces are used.)\nIn \"hop across\", the most popular variation, each player starts with their colored pieces on one of the six points or corners of the star and attempts to race them all home into the opposite corner. Players take turns moving a single piece, either by moving one step in any direction to an adjacent empty space, or by jumping in one or any number of available consecutive hops over other single pieces. A player may not combine hopping with a single-step move \u2014 a move consists of one or the other. There is no capturing in Chinese checkers, so pieces that are hopped over remain active and in play. Turns proceed clockwise around the board.\nIn the diagram, Blue might move the topmost piece one space diagonally forward as shown. A \"hop\" consists of jumping over a single adjacent piece, either one's own or an opponent's, to the empty space directly beyond it in the same line of direction. Red might advance the indicated piece by a chain of seven hops in a single move. It is not mandatory to make the most hops possible. (In some instances a player may choose to stop the jumping sequence part way in order to impede the opponent's progress, or to align pieces for planned future moves.)\nStarting layouts.\nSix players.\nCan be played \"all versus all\", or three teams of two. When playing teams, teammates usually sit at opposite corners of the star, with each team member controlling their own colored set of pieces. The first team to advance both sets to their home destination corners is the winner. The remaining players usually continue play to determine second- and third-place finishers, etc.\nFour players.\nThe four-player game is the same as the game for six players, except that two opposite corners will be unused.\nThree players.\nIn a three-player game, all players control either one or two sets of pieces each. If one set is used, pieces race across the board into empty, opposite corners. If two sets are used, each player controls two differently colored sets of pieces at opposite corners of the star.\nTwo players.\nIn a two-player game, each player plays one, two, or three sets of pieces. If one set is played, the pieces usually go into the opponent's starting corner, and the number of pieces per side is increased to 15 (instead of the usual 10). If two sets are played, the pieces can either go into the opponent's starting corners, or one of the players' two sets can go into an opposite empty corner. If three sets are played, the pieces usually go into the opponent's starting corners.\nStrategy.\nA basic strategy is to create or find the longest hopping path that leads closest to home, or immediately into it. (Multiple-jump moves are obviously faster to advance pieces than step-by-step moves.) Since either player can make use of any hopping 'ladder' or 'chain' created, a more advanced strategy involves hindering an opposing player, in addition to helping oneself make jumps across the board. Of equal importance are the players' strategies for emptying and filling their starting and home corners. Games between top players are rarely decided by more than a couple of moves.\nDiffering numbers of players result in different starting layouts, in turn imposing different best-game strategies. For example, if a player's home destination corner starts empty (i.e. is not an opponent's starting corner), the player can freely build a 'ladder' or 'bridge' with their pieces between the two opposite ends. But if a player's opponent occupies the home corner, the player may need to wait for opponent pieces to clear before filling the home vacancies.\nVariants.\nFast-paced or Super Chinese Checkers.\nWhile the standard rules allow hopping over only a single adjacent occupied position at a time (as in checkers), this version of the game allows pieces to catapult over multiple adjacent occupied positions in a line when hopping.\nIn the \"fast-paced\" or \"Super Chinese Checkers\" variant, popular in France, a piece may hop over a \"non-adjacent\" piece. A hop consists of jumping over a distant piece (friend or enemy) to a symmetrical position on the opposite side, in the same line of direction. (For example, if there are two empty positions between the jumping piece and the piece being jumped, the jumping piece lands, leaving exactly two empty positions immediately beyond the jumped piece.) As in the standard rules, a jumping move may consist of any number of a chain of hops. (When making a chain of hops, a piece is usually allowed to enter an empty corner, as long as it hops out again before the move is completed.)\nJumping over two or more pieces in a hop is not allowed. Therefore, in this variant, even more than in the standard version, it is sometimes strategically important to keep one's pieces bunched in order to prevent a long opposing hop.\nAn alternative variant allows hops over \"any\" symmetrical arrangement, including pairs of pieces, pieces separated by empty positions, and so on.\nCapture.\nIn the \"capture\" variant, all sixty game pieces start out in the hexagonal field in the center of the gameboard. The center position is left unoccupied, so pieces form a symmetric hexagonal pattern. Color is irrelevant in this variant, so players take turns hopping any game piece over any other eligible game piece(s) on the board. The hopped-over pieces are captured (retired from the game, as in English draughts) and collected in the capturing player's bin. Only jumping moves are allowed; the game ends when no further jumps are possible. The player with the most captured pieces is the winner.\nThe board is tightly packed at the start of the game. As more pieces are captured, the board frees up, often allowing multiple captures to take place in a single move.\nTwo or more players can compete in this variant, but if there are more than six players, not everyone will get a fair turn.\nThis variant resembles the game Leap Frog. The main difference being that in Leap Frog, the board is a square board.\nDiamond game.\nDiamond game () is a variant of Chinese checkers played in South Korea and Japan. It uses the same jump rule as in Chinese checkers. The aim of the game is to enter all one's pieces into the star corner on the opposite side of the board, before opponents do the same. Each player has ten or fifteen pieces. Ten-piece diamond uses a smaller gameboard than Chinese checkers, with 73 spaces. Fifteen-piece diamond uses the same board as in Chinese checkers, with 121 spaces. To play diamond, each player selects one color and places their 10 or 15 pieces on a triangle. Two or three players can compete.\nUsually, there are one \"king piece\" () and 14 common pieces () on each side. The king piece is the piece at the apex of each area and can jump over the common pieces, but the common pieces cannot jump over the king piece.\nYin and Yang.\nIn Yin and Yang, only two players compete and as in chess, Go, and Othello, only the black and the white marbles are used. For more interesting play, at the start of the game, the triangle placement of the opponents' marbles does not have to be 180 degrees in opposition.\nOrder Out Of Chaos.\nTwo or more players select their coloured marbles and then those marbles are randomly placed in the centre of the board. The object of the game is then for the players to move their marbles out of the chaos to their home corners, creating order; the reverse of half a traditional game."}
{"id": "6639", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6639", "title": "Cantor Fitzgerald", "text": "Cantor Fitzgerald, L.P. is an American financial services firm that was founded in 1945. It specializes in institutional equity, fixed-income sales and trading, and serving the middle market with investment banking services, prime brokerage, and commercial real estate financing. It is also active in new businesses, including advisory and asset management services, gaming technology, and e-commerce. It has more than 5,000 institutional clients.\nCantor Fitzgerald is one of 24 primary dealers that are authorized to trade US government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.\nCantor Fitzgerald's 1,600 employees work in more than 30 locations, including financial centers in the Americas, Europe, Asia-Pacific, and the Middle East. Together with its affiliates, Cantor Fitzgerald operates in more than 60 offices in 20 countries and has more than 12,500 employees.\nBefore 2001, the company's headquarters were located between the 101st and 105th floors of the North Tower of the World Trade Center in New York City, just above the impact site of American Airlines Flight 11 during the September 11 attacks. 658 Cantor Fitzgerald employees who were present that day were killed, representing the largest loss of life among any single organization in the attacks.\nEarly history.\nCantor Fitzgerald was formed in 1945 by Bernard Gerald Cantor and John Fitzgerald as an investment bank and brokerage business. It later became known for its computer-based bond brokerage, the quality of its institutional distribution business model, and the market's premier government securities dealer.\nIn 1965, Cantor Fitzgerald began \"large block\" sales/trading of equities for institutional customers. It became the world's first electronic marketplace for US government securities in 1972, and in 1983, it was the first to offer worldwide screen brokerage services in US government securities.\nIn 1991, Howard Lutnick was named president and CEO of Cantor Fitzgerald; he became chairman of Cantor Fitzgerald, L.P., in 1996.\n9/11 attacks.\nCantor Fitzgerald's corporate headquarters and New York City office, on the 101st to the 105th floors of 1 World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan (2 to 6 floors above the impact zone of American Airlines Flight 11), were destroyed during the September 11, 2001 attacks. At 8:46:46\u00a0a.m., eighteen seconds after the plane struck the tower, a Goldman Sachs server issued an alert saying that its trading system had gone offline because it could not connect with the server. Since all stairwells leading past the impact zone were destroyed by the initial crash or blocked with smoke, fire, or debris, every employee who reported for work that morning was killed in the attacks; 658 of its 960 New York employees were killed or missing, or 68.5% of its total workforce, which was considerably more than any of the other World Trade Center tenants, the New York City Police Department, the Port Authority Police Department, the New York City Fire Department, or the Department of Defense. Forty-six contractors, food service workers, and visitors in the Cantor Fitzgerald offices at the time were also killed. CEO Howard Lutnick was not present that day, but his younger brother, Gary, was among those killed. Lutnick vowed to keep the company alive, and the company was able to bring its trading markets back online within a week.\nOn September 19, Cantor Fitzgerald made a pledge to distribute 25% of the firm's profits for the next five years, and it committed to paying for ten years of health care for the benefit of the families of its 658 former Cantor Fitzgerald, eSpeed, and TradeSpark employees (profits that would otherwise have been distributed to the Cantor Fitzgerald partners). In 2006, the company had completed its promise, having paid a total of $180\u00a0million (and an additional $17\u00a0million from a relief fund run by Lutnick's sister, Edie).\nUntil the attacks, Cantor had handled about a quarter of the daily transactions in the multi-trillion dollar treasury security market. Cantor Fitzgerald has since rebuilt its infrastructure, partly through the efforts of its London office, and now has its headquarters in Midtown Manhattan. The company's effort to regain its footing was the subject of Tom Barbash's 2003 book \"On Top of the World: Cantor Fitzgerald, Howard Lutnick, and 9/11: A Story of Loss and Renewal\" as well as a 2012 documentary, \"Out of the Clear Blue Sky\".\nOn September 2, 2004, Cantor and other organizations filed a civil lawsuit against Saudi Arabia for allegedly providing money to the hijackers and al-Qaeda. It was later joined in the suit by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Most of the claims against Saudi Arabia were dismissed on January 18, 2005.\nIn December 2013, Cantor Fitzgerald settled its lawsuit against American Airlines for $135 million. Cantor Fitzgerald had been suing for loss of property and interruption of business by alleging the airline to have been negligent by allowing hijackers to board Flight 11.\nRecent history.\nIn 2003, the firm launched its fixed-income sales and trading group. Three years later, the Federal Reserve added Cantor Fitzgerald &amp; Co. to its list of primary dealers. The firm later launched Cantor Prime Services in 2009. It was meant to be a provider of multi-asset, perimeter brokerage prime brokerage platforms to exploit its clearing, financing, and execution capabilities. A year after, Cantor Fitzgerald began building its real estate business with the launch of CCRE. Cantor's affiliate, BGC Partners, expanded into commercial real estate services in 2011 by its purchase of Newmark Knight Frank and the assets of Grubb &amp; Ellis, to form Newmark Grubb Knight Frank.\nOn December 5, 2014, two Cantor Fitzgerald analysts were said to be in the top 25 analysts on TipRanks. Cantor Fitzgerald has a prolific special-purpose acquisition company underwriting practice, having led all banks in SPAC underwriting activity in both 2018 and 2019.\nIn March 2016, Sage Kelly, formerly of Jefferies &amp; Co., joined the firm as senior managing director and head of its investment-banking division.\nPhilanthropy.\nEdie wrote \"An Unbroken Bond: The Untold Story of How the 658 Cantor Fitzgerald Families Faced the Tragedy of 9/11 and Beyond\". All proceeds from the book's sale benefit the Cantor Fitzgerald Relief Fund and the charities it assists.\nThe Cantor Fitzgerald Relief Fund provided $10 million to families affected by Hurricane Sandy. Howard Lutnick and the Relief Fund \"adopted\" 19 elementary schools in impacted areas by distributing $1,000 prepaid debit cards to each family from the schools. A total of $10 million in funds was given to families affected by the storm.\nTwo days after the 2013 Moore tornado struck Moore, Oklahoma, killing 24 people and injuring hundreds, Lutnick pledged to donate $2 million to families affected by the tornado. The donation was given to families in the form of $1,000 debit cards.\nEach year, on September 11, Cantor Fitzgerald and its affiliate, BGC Partners, donate 100% of their revenue to charitable causes on their annual Charity Day, which was initially established to raise money to assist the families of the Cantor employees who died in the World Trade Center attacks. Since its inception, Charity Day has raised $192 million for charities globally.\nSubsidiaries and affiliates.\nThe firm has many subsidiaries and affiliates, including:"}
{"id": "6641", "revid": "2598014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6641", "title": "Cane toad", "text": "The cane toad (Rhinella marina), also known as the giant neotropical toad or marine toad, is a large, terrestrial true toad native to South and mainland Central America, but which has been introduced to various islands throughout Oceania and the Caribbean, as well as Northern Australia. It is a member of the genus \"Rhinella\", which includes many true toad species found throughout Central and South America, but it was formerly assigned to the genus \"Bufo\".\nA fossil toad (specimen UCMP 41159) from the La Venta fauna of the late Miocene in Colombia is morphologically indistinguishable from modern cane toads from northern South America. It was discovered in a floodplain deposit, which suggests the \"R. marina\" habitat preferences have long been for open areas. The cane toad is a prolific breeder; females lay single-clump spawns with thousands of eggs. Its reproductive success is partly because of opportunistic feeding: it has a diet, unusual among anurans, of both dead and living matter. Adults average in length; the largest recorded specimen had a snout-vent length of .\nThe cane toad has poison glands, and the tadpoles are highly toxic to most animals if ingested. Its toxic skin can kill many animals, both wild and domesticated, and cane toads are particularly dangerous to dogs. Because of its voracious appetite, the cane toad has been introduced to many regions of the Pacific and the Caribbean islands as a method of agricultural pest control. The common name of the species is derived from its use against the cane beetle (\"Dermolepida albohirtum\"), which damages sugar cane. The cane toad is now considered a pest and an invasive species in many of its introduced regions. The 1988 film \"\" documented the trials and tribulations of the introduction of cane toads in Australia.\nTaxonomy.\nHistorically, the cane toad was used to eradicate pests from sugarcane, giving rise to its common name. The cane toad has many other common names, including \"giant toad\" and \"marine toad\"; the former refers to its size, and the latter to the binomial name, \"R. marina\". It was one of many species described by Carl Linnaeus in his 18th-century work \"Systema Naturae\" (1758). Linnaeus based the specific epithet \"marina\" on an illustration by Dutch zoologist Albertus Seba, who mistakenly believed the cane toad to inhabit both terrestrial and marine environments. Other common names include \"giant neotropical toad\", \"Dominican toad\", \"giant marine toad\", and \"South American cane toad\". In Trinidadian English, they are commonly called \"crapaud\", the French word for toad.\nThe genus \"Rhinella\" is considered to constitute a distinct genus of its own, thus changing the scientific name of the cane toad. In this case, the specific name \"marinus\" (masculine) changes to \"marina\" (feminine) to conform with the rules of gender agreement as set out by the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, changing the binomial name from \"Bufo marinus\" to \"Rhinella marina\"; the binomial \"Rhinella marinus\" was subsequently introduced as a synonym through misspelling by Pramuk, Robertson, Sites, and Noonan (2008). Though controversial (with many traditional herpetologists still using \"Bufo marinus\") the binomial \"Rhinella marina\" is gaining in acceptance with such bodies as the IUCN, Encyclopaedia of Life, Amphibian Species of the World and increasing numbers of scientific publications adopting its usage.\nSince 2016, cane toad populations native to Mesoamerica and northwestern South America are sometimes considered to be a separate species, \"Rhinella horribilis\".\nIn Australia, the adults may be confused with large native frogs from the genera \"Limnodynastes\", \"Cyclorana\", and \"Mixophyes\". These species can be distinguished from the cane toad by the absence of large parotoid glands behind their eyes and the lack of a ridge between the nostril and the eye. Cane toads have been confused with the giant burrowing frog (\"Heleioporus australiacus\"), because both are large and warty in appearance; however, the latter can be readily distinguished from the former by its vertical pupils and its silver-grey (as opposed to gold) irises. Juvenile cane toads may be confused with species of the genus \"Uperoleia\", but their adult colleagues can be distinguished by the lack of bright colouring on the groin and thighs.\nIn the United States, the cane toad closely resembles many bufonid species. In particular, it could be confused with the southern toad (\"Bufo terrestris\"), which can be distinguished by the presence of two bulbs in front of the parotoid glands.\nTaxonomy and evolution.\nThe cane toad genome has been sequenced and certain Australian academics believe this will help in understanding how the toad can quickly evolve to adapt to new environments, the workings of its infamous toxin, and hopefully provide new options for halting this species' march across Australia and other places it has spread as an invasive pest.\nStudies of the genome confirm its evolutionary origins in northern part of South America and its close genetic relation to \"Rhinella diptycha\" and other similar species of the genus. Recent studies suggest that \"R. marina\" diverged between 2.75 and 9.40 million years ago.\nA recent split in the species into further subspecies may have occurred approximately 2.7 million years ago following the isolation of population groups by the rising Venezuelan Andes.\nDescription.\nConsidered the largest species in the Bufonidae, the cane toad is very large; the females are significantly longer than males, reaching a typical length of , with a maximum of . Larger toads tend to be found in areas of lower population density. They have a life expectancy of 10 to 15\u00a0years in the wild, and can live considerably longer in captivity, with one specimen reportedly surviving for 35\u00a0years.\nThe skin of the cane toad is dry and warty. Distinct ridges above the eyes run down the snout. Individual cane toads can be grey, yellowish, red-brown, or olive-brown, with varying patterns. A large parotoid gland lies behind each eye. The ventral surface is cream-coloured and may have blotches in shades of black or brown. The pupils are horizontal and the irises golden. The toes have a fleshy webbing at their base, and the fingers are free of webbing.\nTypically, juvenile cane toads have smooth, dark skin, although some specimens have a red wash. Juveniles lack the adults' large parotoid glands, so they are usually less poisonous. The tadpoles are small and uniformly black, and are bottom-dwellers, tending to form schools. Tadpoles range from in length.\nEcology, behaviour and life history.\nThe common name \"marine toad\" and the scientific name \"Rhinella marina\" suggest a link to marine life, but cane toads do not live in the sea. However, laboratory experiments suggest that tadpoles can tolerate salt concentrations equivalent to 15% of seawater (~5.4\u2030), and recent field observations found living tadpoles and toadlets at salinities of 27.5\u2030 on Coiba Island, Panama. The cane toad inhabits open grassland and woodland, and has displayed a \"distinct preference\" for areas modified by humans, such as gardens and drainage ditches. In their native habitats, the toads can be found in subtropical forests, although dense foliage tends to limit their dispersal.\nThe cane toad begins life as an egg, which is laid as part of long strings of jelly in water. A female lays 8,000\u201325,000 eggs at once and the strings can stretch up to in length. The black eggs are covered by a membrane and their diameter is about . The rate at which an egg grows into a tadpole increases with temperature. Tadpoles typically hatch within 48\u00a0hours, but the period can vary from 14\u00a0hours to almost a week. This process usually involves thousands of tadpoles\u2014which are small, black, and have short tails\u2014forming into groups. Between 12 and 60\u00a0days are needed for the tadpoles to develop into juveniles, with four weeks being typical. Similarly to their adult counterparts, eggs and tadpoles are toxic to many animals.\nWhen they emerge, toadlets typically are about in length, and grow rapidly. While the rate of growth varies by region, time of year, and sex, an average initial growth rate of per day is seen, followed by an average rate of per day. Growth typically slows once the toads reach sexual maturity. This rapid growth is important for their survival; in the period between metamorphosis and subadulthood, the young toads lose the toxicity that protected them as eggs and tadpoles, but have yet to fully develop the parotoid glands that produce bufotoxin. Only an estimated 0.5% of cane toads reach adulthood, in part because they lack this key defense\u2014but also due to tadpole cannibalism. Although cannibalism does occur in the native population in South America, the rapid evolution occurring in the unnaturally large population in Australia has produced tadpoles 30x more likely to be \"interested\" in cannibalising their siblings, and 2.6x more likely to actually \"do so\". They have also evolved to shorten their tadpole phase in response to the presence of older tadpoles. These changes are likely genetic, although no genetic basis has been determined.\nAs with rates of growth, the point at which the toads become sexually mature varies across different regions. In New Guinea, sexual maturity is reached by female toads with a snout\u2013vent length between , while toads in Panama achieve maturity when they are between in length. In tropical regions, such as their native habitats, breeding occurs throughout the year, but in subtropical areas, breeding occurs only during warmer periods that coincide with the onset of the wet season.\nThe cane toad is estimated to have a critical thermal maximum of and a minimum of around . The ranges can change due to adaptation to the local environment. Cane toads from some populations can adjust their thermal tolerance within a few hours of encountering low temperatures. The toad is able to rapidly acclimate to the cold using physiological plasticity, though there is also evidence that more northerly populations of cane toads in the United States are better cold-adapted than more southerly populations. These adaptations have allowed the cane toad to establish invasive populations across the world. The toad's ability to rapidly acclimate to thermal changes suggests that current models may underestimate the potential range of habitats that the toad can populate. The cane toad has a high tolerance to water loss; some can withstand a 52.6% loss of body water, allowing them to survive outside tropical environments.\nDiet.\nMost frogs identify prey by movement, and vision appears to be the primary method by which the cane toad detects prey; however, it can also locate food using its sense of smell. They eat a wide range of material; in addition to the normal prey of small rodents, other small mammals, reptiles, other amphibians, birds, and even bats and a range of invertebrates (such as ants, beetles, earwigs, dragonflies, grasshoppers, true bugs, crustaceans, and gastropods), they also eat plants, dog food, cat food, feces, and household refuse.\nDefences.\nThe skin of the adult cane toad is toxic, as well as the enlarged parotoid glands behind the eyes, and other glands across its back. When the toad is threatened, its glands secrete a milky-white fluid known as bufotoxin. Components of bufotoxin are toxic to many animals; even human deaths have been recorded due to the consumption of cane toads. Dogs are especially prone to be poisoned by licking or biting toads. Pets showing excessive drooling, extremely red gums, head-shaking, crying, loss of coordination, and/or convulsions require immediate veterinary attention.\nBufotenin, one of the chemicals excreted by the cane toad, is classified as a schedule 9 drug under Australian law, alongside heroin and LSD. The effects of bufotenin are thought to be similar to those of mild poisoning; the stimulation, which includes mild hallucinations, lasts less than an hour. As the cane toad excretes bufotenin in small amounts, and other toxins in relatively large quantities, toad licking could result in serious illness or death.\nIn addition to releasing toxin, the cane toad is capable of inflating its lungs, puffing up, and lifting its body off the ground to appear taller and larger to a potential predator.\nSince 2011, experimenters in the Kimberley region of Western Australia have used poisonous sausages containing toad meat in an attempt to protect native animals from cane toads' deadly impact. The Western Australian Department of Environment and Conservation, along with the University of Sydney, developed these sausage-shaped baits as a tool in order to train native animals not to eat the toads. By blending bits of toad with a nausea-inducing chemical, the baits train the animals to stay away from the amphibians.\nYoung cane toads that aren't lethal upon ingestion have also been used to teach native predators avoidance, namely yellow-spotted monitors. 200,000 metamorphs, tadpoles, and eggs in total were released in areas ahead of inevitable invasion fronts. Following invasion by wild cane toads, yellow-spotted monitors in control areas bereft of the \"teacher toads\" were virtually wiped out, but experimental areas still contained substantial populations of yellow-spotted monitors.\nPredators.\nMany species prey on the cane toad and its tadpoles in its native habitat, including the broad-snouted caiman (\"Caiman latirostris\"), the banded cat-eyed snake (\"Leptodeira annulata\"), eels (family Anguillidae), various species of killifish, and \"Paraponera clavata\" (bullet ants).\nPredators outside the cane toad's native range include the rock flagtail (\"Kuhlia rupestris\"), some species of catfish (order Siluriformes), some species of ibis (subfamily Threskiornithinae), the whistling kite (\"Haliastur sphenurus\"), the rakali (\"Hydromys chrysogaster\"), the black rat (\"Rattus rattus\") and the water monitor (\"Varanus salvator\"). The tawny frogmouth (\"Podargus strigoides\") and the Papuan frogmouth (\"Podargus papuensis\") have been reported as feeding on cane toads; some Australian crows (\"Corvus\" spp.) have also learned strategies allowing them to feed on cane toads, such as using their beak to flip toads onto their backs. Kookaburras also prey on the amphibians.\nOpossums of the genus \"Didelphis\" likely can eat cane toads with impunity. Meat ants are unaffected by the cane toads' toxins, so are able to kill them. The cane toad's normal response to attack is to stand still and let its toxin kill or repel the attacker, which allows the ants to attack and eat the toad. Saw-shelled turtles have also been seen successfully and safely eating cane toads.\nIn Australia rakali (Australian water rats) in two years learnt how to eat cane toads safely. They select the largest toads, turn them over, remove the poisonous gallbladder, and eat the heart and other organs with \"surgical precision\". They remove the toxic skin and eat the thigh muscle. Other animals such as crows and kites turn cane toads inside out and eat non-poisonous organs, also thus avoiding the skin.\nDistribution.\nThe cane toad is native to the Americas, and its range stretches from the Rio Grande Valley in South Texas to the central Amazon and southeastern Peru, and some of the continental islands near Venezuela (such as Trinidad and Tobago). This area encompasses both tropical and semiarid environments. The density of the cane toad is significantly lower within its native distribution than in places where it has been introduced. In South America, the density was recorded to be 20 adults per of shoreline, 1 to 2% of the density in Australia.\nAs an introduced species.\nThe cane toad has been introduced to many regions of the world\u2014particularly the Pacific\u2014for the biological control of agricultural pests. These introductions have generally been well documented, and the cane toad may be one of the most studied of any introduced species.\nBefore the early 1840s, the cane toad had been introduced into Martinique and Barbados, from French Guiana and Guyana. An introduction to Jamaica was made in 1844 in an attempt to reduce the rat population. Despite its failure to control the rodents, the cane toad was introduced to Puerto Rico in the early 20th century in the hope that it would counter a beetle infestation ravaging the sugarcane plantations. The Puerto Rican scheme was successful and halted the economic damage caused by the beetles, prompting scientists in the 1930s to promote it as an ideal solution to agricultural pests.\nAs a result, many countries in the Pacific region emulated the lead of Puerto Rico and introduced the toad in the 1930s. Introduced populations are in Australia, Florida, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, the Ogasawara, Ishigaki Island and the Dait\u014d Islands of Japan, Taiwan Nantou Caotun, most Caribbean islands, Fiji and many other Pacific islands, including Hawaii. Since then, the cane toad has become a pest in many host countries, and poses a serious threat to native animals.\nAustralia.\nFollowing the apparent success of the cane toad in eating the beetles threatening the sugarcane plantations of Puerto Rico, and the fruitful introductions into Hawai\u02bbi and the Philippines, a strong push was made for the cane toad to be released in Australia to negate the pests ravaging the Queensland cane fields. As a result, 102 toads were collected from Hawai\u02bbi and brought to Australia. Queensland's sugar scientists released the toad into cane fields in August 1935. After this initial release, the Commonwealth Department of Health decided to ban future introductions until a study was conducted into the feeding habits of the toad. The study was completed in 1936 and the ban lifted, when large-scale releases were undertaken; by March 1937, 62,000 toadlets had been released into the wild. The toads became firmly established in Queensland, increasing exponentially in number and extending their range into the Northern Territory and New South Wales. In 2010, one was found on the far western coast in Broome, Western Australia.\nHowever, the toad was generally unsuccessful in reducing the targeted grey-backed cane beetles (\"Dermolepida albohirtum\"), in part because the cane fields provided insufficient shelter for the predators during the day, and in part because the beetles live at the tops of sugar cane\u2014and cane toads are not good climbers. Since its original introduction, the cane toad has had a particularly marked effect on Australian biodiversity. The population of a number of native predatory reptiles has declined, such as the varanid lizards \"Varanus mertensi\", \"V. mitchelli\", and \"V. panoptes\", the land snakes \"Pseudechis australis\" and \"Acanthophis antarcticus\", and the crocodile species \"Crocodylus johnstoni\"; in contrast, the population of the agamid lizard \"Amphibolurus gilberti\"\u2014known to be a prey item of \"V. panoptes\"\u2014has increased. Meat ants, however, are able to kill cane toads. The cane toad has also been linked to decreases in northern quolls in the southern region of Kakadu National Park and even their local extinction.\nCaribbean.\nThe cane toad was introduced to various Caribbean islands to counter a number of pests infesting local crops. While it was able to establish itself on some islands, such as Barbados, Jamaica, Hispaniola and Puerto Rico, other introductions, such as in Cuba before 1900 and in 1946, and on the islands of Dominica and Grand Cayman, were unsuccessful.\nThe earliest recorded introductions were to Barbados and Martinique. The Barbados introductions were focused on the biological control of pests damaging the sugarcane crops, and while the toads became abundant, they have done even less to control the pests than in Australia. The toad was introduced to Martinique from French Guiana before 1944 and became established. Today, they reduce the mosquito and mole cricket populations. A third introduction to the region occurred in 1884, when toads appeared in Jamaica, reportedly imported from Barbados to help control the rodent population. While they had no significant effect on the rats, they nevertheless became well established. Other introductions include the release on Antigua\u2014possibly before 1916, although this initial population may have died out by 1934 and been reintroduced at a later date\u2014and Montserrat, which had an introduction before 1879 that led to the establishment of a solid population, which was apparently sufficient to survive the Soufri\u00e8re Hills volcano eruption in 1995.\nIn 1920, the cane toad was introduced into Puerto Rico to control the populations of white grub (\"Phyllophaga\" spp.), a sugarcane pest. Before this, the pests were manually collected by humans, so the introduction of the toad eliminated labor costs. A second group of toads was imported in 1923, and by 1932, the cane toad was well established. The population of white grubs dramatically decreased, and this was attributed to the cane toad at the annual meeting of the International Sugar Cane Technologists in Puerto Rico. However, there may have been other factors. The six-year period after 1931\u2014when the cane toad was most prolific, and the white grub had a dramatic decline\u2014had the highest-ever rainfall for Puerto Rico. Nevertheless, the cane toad was assumed to have controlled the white grub; this view was reinforced by a \"Nature\" article titled \"Toads save sugar crop\", and this led to large-scale introductions throughout many parts of the Pacific.\nThe cane toad has been spotted in Carriacou and Dominica, the latter appearance occurring in spite of the failure of the earlier introductions. On September 8, 2013, the cane toad was also discovered on the island of New Providence in the Bahamas.\nThe Philippines.\nThe cane toad was first introduced deliberately into the Philippines in 1930 as a biological control agent of pests in sugarcane plantations, after the success of the experimental introductions into Puerto Rico. It subsequently became the most ubiquitous amphibian in the islands. It still retains the common name of \"bak\u00ee\" or \"kamprag\" in the Visayan languages, a corruption of 'American frog', referring to its origins. It is also commonly known as \"bullfrog\" in Philippine English.\nFiji.\nThe cane toad was introduced into Fiji to combat insects that infested sugarcane plantations. The introduction of the cane toad to the region was first suggested in 1933, following the successes in Puerto Rico and Hawai\u02bbi. After considering the possible side effects, the national government of Fiji decided to release the toad in 1953, and 67 specimens were subsequently imported from Hawai\u02bbi. Once the toads were established, a 1963 study concluded, as the toad's diet included both harmful and beneficial invertebrates, it was considered \"economically neutral\". Today, the cane toad can be found on all major islands in Fiji, although they tend to be smaller than their counterparts in other regions.\nNew Guinea.\nThe cane toad was introduced into New Guinea to control the hawk moth larvae eating sweet potato crops. The first release occurred in 1937 using toads imported from Hawai\u02bbi, with a second release the same year using specimens from the Australian mainland. Evidence suggests a third release in 1938, consisting of toads being used for human pregnancy tests\u2014many species of toad were found to be effective for this task, and were employed for about 20\u00a0years after the discovery was announced in 1948. Initial reports argued the toads were effective in reducing the levels of cutworms and sweet potato yields were thought to be improving. As a result, these first releases were followed by further distributions across much of the region, although their effectiveness on other crops, such as cabbages, has been questioned; when the toads were released at Wau, the cabbages provided insufficient shelter and the toads rapidly left the immediate area for the superior shelter offered by the forest. A similar situation had previously arisen in the Australian cane fields, but this experience was either unknown or ignored in New Guinea. The cane toad has since become abundant in rural and urban areas.\nUnited States.\nThe cane toad naturally exists in South Texas, but attempts (both deliberate and accidental) have been made to introduce the species to other parts of the country. These include introductions to Florida and to Hawai\u02bbi, as well as largely unsuccessful introductions to Louisiana.\nInitial releases into Florida failed. Attempted introductions before 1936 and 1944, intended to control sugarcane pests, were unsuccessful as the toads failed to proliferate. Later attempts failed in the same way. However, the toad gained a foothold in the state after an accidental release by an importer at Miami International Airport in 1957, and deliberate releases by animal dealers in 1963 and 1964 established the toad in other parts of Florida. Today, the cane toad is well established in the state, from the Keys to north of Tampa, and they are gradually extending further northward. In Florida, the toad is a regarded as a threat to native species and pets; so much so, the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission recommends residents to kill them.\nAround 150 cane toads were introduced to O\u02bbahu in Hawai\u02bbi in 1932, and the population swelled to 105,517 after 17\u00a0months. The toads were sent to the other islands, and more than 100,000 toads were distributed by July 1934; eventually over 600,000 were transported.\nUses.\nOther than the use as a biological control for pests, the cane toad has been employed in a number of commercial and noncommercial applications. Traditionally, within the toad's natural range in South America, the Embera-Wounaan would \"milk\" the toads for their toxin, which was then employed as an arrow poison. The toxins may have been used as an entheogen by the Olmec people. The toad has been hunted as a food source in parts of Peru, and eaten after the careful removal of the skin and parotoid glands. When properly prepared, the meat of the toad is considered healthy and as a source of omega-3 fatty acids. More recently, the toad's toxins have been used in a number of new ways: bufotenin has been used in Japan as an aphrodisiac and a hair restorer, and in cardiac surgery in China to lower the heart rates of patients. New research has suggested that the cane toad's poison may have some applications in treating prostate cancer.\nOther modern applications of the cane toad include pregnancy testing, as pets, laboratory research, and the production of leather goods. Pregnancy testing was conducted in the mid-20th century by injecting urine from a woman into a male toad's lymph sacs, and if spermatozoa appeared in the toad's urine, the patient was deemed to be pregnant. The tests using toads were faster than those employing mammals; the toads were easier to raise, and, although the initial 1948 discovery employed \"Bufo arenarum\" for the tests, it soon became clear that a variety of anuran species were suitable, including the cane toad. As a result, toads were employed in this task for around 20\u00a0years. As a laboratory animal, the cane toad has numerous advantages: they are plentiful, and easy and inexpensive to maintain and handle. The use of the cane toad in experiments started in the 1950s, and by the end of the 1960s, large numbers were being collected and exported to high schools and universities. Since then, a number of Australian states have introduced or tightened importation regulations.\nThere are several commercial uses for dead cane toads. Cane toad skin is made into leather and novelty items. Stuffed cane toads, posed and accessorised, are merchandised at souvenir shops for tourists. Attempts have been made to produce fertiliser from toad carcasses."}
{"id": "6643", "revid": "17172051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6643", "title": "Croquet", "text": "Croquet ( or ) is a sport which involves hitting wooden, plastic, or composite balls with a mallet through hoops (often called \"wickets\" in the United States) embedded in a grass playing court.\nVariations.\nIn all forms of croquet, individual players or teams take turns striking the balls, scoring points by knocking them through a hoop. The game ends when a player or team reaches a predetermined number of points. Several variations exist that differ in when and how a stroke may be legally played, when points are scored, the layout of the lawn, and the target score. Commonly, social games adopt further non-standard variations to adapt play to the conditions. In all versions, players of all ages and genders compete on equal terms and are ranked together.\nTwo versions of the game are directly governed by the World Croquet Federation, which organises individual and team World Championships. Other regional variants which developed in parallel remain common in parts of the world.\nAssociation croquet.\nAssociation croquet is played between two individuals or teams, each playing with two balls. The object of the game is to be the first to strike each of their balls through all six hoops in both directions, in a fixed order, and to strike the central peg. Each of these actions scores a point, with the maximum score being 26 points.\nThe first four turns must be taken to play the four balls onto the lawn from one of two \"baulk lines\" defined as one yard into the lawn on the western half of the south boundary and the eastern half of the north boundary. After this, players elect at the start of each turn which of their two balls to play for the duration of that turn.\nDuring a turn, a player may earn extra shots in two ways. A player earns a single extra shot by scoring a hoop point (hitting the striker's ball through a hoop), or two extra shots by causing their ball to contact another ball-an action called a \"roquet\". When a roquet is made, the player may pick up their ball and place it in contact with the roqueted ball. The next shot must move both the player's ball and the roqueted ball, and it is the \"croquet\" stroke that gives the game its name. After a successful croquet stroke, the player has a single further shot, known as the \"continuation\". During a turn, each of the other three balls may only be croqueted once between hoop points, but by stringing together a series of roquets, croquets, and scored hoops, several points may be scored in a single turn.\nAdvanced variants of association croquet give further penalties to dissuade skilled players from running every hoop with a ball on a single , while handicap versions give weaker players chances to continue play after making an error. The extra turns, called \"bisques\" are effective in levelling the odds of winning.\nGolf croquet.\nGolf croquet is played between two individuals or teams, each playing with two balls. The object of the game is to reach a certain number of points, typically seven, earned by being the first to run a hoop.\nThe game opens by playing each ball into the lawn from the fourth (south-eastern) corner of the lawn. Balls must be played in order (for the primary ball colours, this is blue, red, black, and yellow), and this order of play is maintained throughout the game. Hoops are contested in a fixed order, with a point awarded to the owner of the first ball to pass through the hoop in the correct direction. After a point is awarded, all players move on to contest the next hoop. Balls that are played more than halfway to the next hoop before a point is scored are considered offside, and are moved to penalty areas.\nGolf croquet is the fastest-growing version of the game, owing largely to its simplicity and competitiveness. There is an especially large interest in competitive success among players in Egypt. By comparison with association croquet, golf croquet requires a smaller variety of shots and emphasises strategic skills and accurate shot-making. Games are shorter, balls are more likely to be hit harder, and 'jump' shots are more likely to be witnessed, where a ball is played to deliberately jump off the ground and over another ball.\nAmerican six-wicket.\nThe American-rules version of croquet is the dominant version of the game in the United States and is also widely played in Canada. It is governed by the United States Croquet Association. Its genesis is mostly in association croquet, but it differs in a number of important ways that reflect the home-grown traditions of American \"backyard\" croquet. Official rules were first published in 1894 by the Spalding Athletic Library, as adopted by the National American Croquet Association.\nAmerican six-wicket uses the same six-wicket layout as both association croquet and golf croquet, and is also played by two individuals or teams, each owning two balls.\nLike association croquet, the object of the game is to be the first to pass each of their balls through all six hoops in both directions and to strike the central peg, for a total of 26 points. Unlike association croquet, balls are always played in the same sequence (blue, red, black, yellow). The limitation of roqueting each ball once between hoop points is, unlike in association croquet, carried over from turn to turn until the ball scores the next hoop. In American six-wicket, this is termed \"deadness\", and a separate board is required to keep track of the deadness for all four balls. A further difference is the more restrictive boundary-line rules of American croquet. In the American game, roqueting a ball out of bounds or running a hoop so that the ball goes out of bounds causes the turn to end, and balls that go out of bounds are replaced only from the boundary rather than as in association croquet. \"Attacking\" balls on the boundary line to bring them into play is thus far more challenging.\nNine-wicket.\nNine-wicket croquet, sometimes called \"backyard croquet\", is played mainly in Canada and the United States and is the game most recreational players in those countries call simply \"croquet\". In this version of croquet, there are nine wickets, two stakes, and up to six balls. The course is arranged in a double-diamond pattern, with one stake at each end of the course. Players start at one stake, navigate one side of the double diamond, hit the turning stake, then navigate the opposite side of the double diamond and hit the starting stake to end. If playing individually (\"Cutthroat\"), the first player to stake out is the winner. In partnership play, all members of a team must stake out, and a player might choose to avoid staking out (becoming a \"Rover\") in order to help a lagging teammate.\nEach time a ball is roqueted, the striker gets two bonus shots.\nFor the first bonus shot, the player has four options:\nThe second bonus shot (\"continuation shot\") is an ordinary shot played from where the striker ball came to rest.\nAn alternative endgame is \"poison\": in this variant, a player who has scored the last wicket but not hit the starting stake becomes a \"poison ball\", which may eliminate other balls from the game by roqueting them. A non-poison ball that roquets a poison ball has the normal options. A poison ball that hits a stake or passes through any wicket (possibly through the action of a non-poison player) is eliminated. The last person remaining is the winner.\nThe Richmond Virginia Extreme Croquet Club has these rules:\n\u2022 Revert Rule: If a ball traverses its prior wicket in the opposite direction, this now becomes its current wicket; exceptions: (1) a rover cannot be reverted; (2) until the ball remakes that wicket, it cannot be reverted again.\n\u2022 Nosering Rule (an admittedly stupid name, the origin lost to history): Once per game, or sometimes once per half, at the end of one's turn, one may move one's ball exactly one mallet head, except not into or thru any wicket in either direction, and not to be touching either stake. In a team game, one may use a teammate's unused nosering move.\n\u2022 Alzheimer's Rule: Before or after hitting the ball, if that player or anyone else realizes that the player forgot their current wicket, stake, or other mandatory objective, the hit is retaken (if in fact it has been taken), except when croqueting another ball; all players have the obligation to point this out before the hit.\n\u2022 Act of Dog: If a player's ball is relocated by an unleashed dog, it shall be played from the location the dog released the ball. If the ball is released out of bounds, then the ball shall be played from the point (after adjusting for a mallet width from the boundary) it was removed from the field.\n\u2022 Dynamic Starting Order: After lagging to the stake for starting order, the players exercise the option to go or not go in order of closeness; after each player goes, the remaining players re-choose who goes next in the same order.\n\u2022 McKlintoc Start, an option to start the game: A ball still on start 1-out or 2-out cannot be used to roquet another ball, nor can it be roquet'd without its owner's permission. Nevertheless, such a ball may hit any other ball or be hit by any other ball; however, the hitter's go is over and no deadness is established.\nInternational Croquet.\nAs well as club-level games, county-level tournaments, and leagues, there are regular world championships and international matches between croquet-playing countries. The sport has particularly strong followings in the UK, US, New Zealand, Australia, and Egypt; many other countries also play. Every four years, the top countries play in the World Team Championships in AC (the MacRobertson Shield) and GC (the Openshaw Shield). The current world rankings show England in top place for AC, followed by Australia in second place, and New Zealand in third place, with the United States in fourth position. The same four countries appear in the top six of the GC country rankings, below Egypt in top position, and with Spain at number six.\nIndividual World Championships usually take place every two or three years. The 2023 AC World Championships took place in London; the winner was Robert Fulford. The current Women's Association Croquet World Champion (2023) is Debbie Lines of England.\nThe most prestigious international team competition in association croquet is the MacRobertson International Croquet Shield. It is contested every three to four years between Australia, England (formerly Great Britain), the United States, and New Zealand. Other nations compete in Tier 2 and Tier 3 World Team Championships. Teams are promoted and relegated between the lower tiers, but there is no relegation to or promotion from the MacRobertson Shield. The current holders of the MacRobertson Shield are England, who won the title in 2023. At the Golf Croquet World Team Championships, eight nations contest the Openshaw Shield. There is promotion and relegation between Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3. The current holders of the Openshaw Shield are New Zealand, who won in 2020. The world's top 10 association croquet players as of October 2023 were Robert Fletcher (Australia), Robert Fulford (England), Paddy Chapman (New Zealand), Jamie Burch (England), Reg Bamford (South Africa), Matthew Essick (USA), Mark Avery (England), Simon Hockey (Australia), Harry Fisher (England), and Jose Riva (Spain).\nIn April 2013, Reg Bamford of South Africa beat Ahmed Nasr of Egypt in the final of the Golf Croquet World Championship in Cairo, becoming the first person to simultaneously hold the title in both association croquet and golf croquet. As of 2023, the Golf Croquet World Champion was Matthew Essick (USA), and the Women's Golf Croquet World Champion was Jamie Gumbrell (Australia). In 2018, two international championships open to both sexes were won by women: in May, Rachel Gee of England beat Pierre Beaudry of Belgium to win the European Golf Croquet championship, and in October, Hanan Rashad of Egypt beat Yasser Fathy (also from Egypt) to win the World over-50s Golf Croquet championship.\nCroquet was an event at the 1900 Summer Olympics. Roque, an American variation on croquet, was an event at the 1904 Summer Olympics. Croquet is recognized as the first Olympic sport to include female participants. In the 1900 Olympic croquet events, France claimed victory in all three competitions. Gaston Aumoitte won the one-ball singles, Chr\u00e9tien Waydelich won the two-ball singles, and the doubles event was won by the pair of Gaston Aumoitte and Georges Johin, securing all the medals as all 10 participants were French.\nHistory.\nThe oldest document to bear the word \"croquet\" with a description of the modern game is the set of rules registered by Isaac Spratt in November 1856 with the Stationers' Company of London. This record is now in the Public Record Office. In 1868, the first croquet all-comers meet was held at Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire, and in the same year, the All England Croquet Club was formed at Wimbledon, London.\nRegardless of when and by what route it reached the British Isles and the British colonies in its recognizable form, croquet is, like pall-mall and trucco, among the later forms of ground billiards, which as a class have been popular in Western Europe back to at least the Late Middle Ages, with roots in classical antiquity, including sometimes the use of arches and pegs along with balls and mallets or other striking sticks (some more akin to modern field hockey sticks). By the 12th century, a team ball game called ' or ', akin to a chaotic version of hockey or football (depending on whether sticks were used), was regularly played in France and southern Britain between villages or parishes; it was attested in Cornwall as early as 1283.\nIn the book \"Queen of Games: The History of Croquet\", Nicky Smith presents two theories of the origin of the modern game of croquet, which took England by storm in the 1860s and then spread overseas.\nFrench origin theory.\nThe first explanation is that the ancestral game was introduced to Britain from France during the 1660\u20131685 reign of Charles II of England, Scotland, and Ireland and was played under the name of ' (among other spellings, today usually \"pall-mall\"), derived ultimately from Latin words for 'ball and mallet' (the latter also found in the name of the earlier French game, '). This was the explanation given in the ninth edition of \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", dated 1877.\nIn his 1801 book \"The Sports and Pastimes of the People of England\", Joseph Strutt described the way pall-mall was played in England at the time:\"Pale-maille is a game wherein a round box[wood] ball is struck with a mallet through a high arch of iron, which he that can do at the fewest blows, or at the number agreed upon, wins. It is to be observed that there are two of these arches, that is, one at either end of the alley. The game of mall was a fashionable amusement in the reign of Charles the Second, and the walk in Saint James's Park, now called the Mall, received its name from having been appropriated to the purpose of playing at mall, where Charles himself and his courtiers frequently exercised themselves in the practice of this pastime.\"\nWhile the name \"pall-mall\" and various games bearing this name also appeared elsewhere (France and Italy), the description above suggests that the croquet-like games in particular were popular in England by the early 17th century. Some other early modern sources refer to pall-mall being played over a large distance (as in golf); however, an image in Strutt's 1801 book shows a croquet-like ground billiards game (balls on the ground, hoop, bats, and peg) being played over a , garden-sized distance. The image's caption describes the game as \"a curious ancient pastime\", confirming that croquet games were not new in early-19th-century England.\nIn Samuel Johnson's 1755 dictionary, his definition of \"pall-mall\" clearly describes a game with similarities to modern croquet: \"A play in which the ball is struck with a mallet through an iron ring\". However, there is no evidence that pall-mall involved the croquet stroke, which is the distinguishing characteristic of the modern game.\nIrish origin theory.\nThe second theory is that the rules of the modern game of croquet arrived in Ireland during the 1850s, perhaps after being brought there from Brittany, where a similar game was played on the beaches. Regular contact between Ireland and France had continued since the Norman invasion of Ireland in 1169. By no later than the early 15th century, the game \" (itself ancestral to pall-mall and perhaps to indoor billiards) was popular in France, including in the courts of Henry II in the 16th century and Louis XIV of the 17th.\nAt least one version of it, \" ('wheel'), was a multi-ball lawn game. Records show a game called \"crookey\", similar to croquet, being played at Castlebellingham in County Louth, Ireland, in 1834, which was introduced to Galway in 1835 and played on the bishop's palace garden, and in the same year to the genteel Dublin suburb of Kingstown (today D\u00fan Laoghaire) where it was first spelled as \"croquet\". There is, however, no pre-1858 Irish document that describes the way the game was played; in particular, there is no reference to the distinctive croquet stroke, which is described above under \"Variations: Association\". The noted croquet historian Dr. Prior, in his book of 1872, makes the categorical statement, \"One thing only is certain: it is from Ireland that croquet came to England and it was on the lawn of the late Lord Lonsdale that it was first played in this country.\"\nJohn Jaques apparently claimed in a letter to Arthur Lillie in 1873 that he had himself seen the game played in Ireland, writing, \"I made the implements and published directions (such as they were) before Mr. Spratt [mentioned above] introduced the subject to me.\" Whatever the truth of the matter, Jaques certainly played an important role in popularising the game, producing editions of the rules in 1857, 1860, and 1864.\nHeyday and decline.\nCroquet became highly popular as a social pastime in England during the 1860s. It was enthusiastically adopted and promoted by the Earl of Essex, who held lavish croquet parties at Cassiobury House, his stately home in Watford, Hertfordshire, and the Earl even launched his own \"Cassiobury\" brand croquet set. By 1867, Jaques had printed 65,000 copies of his \"Laws and Regulations\" of the game. It quickly spread to other Anglophone countries, including Australia, Canada, New Zealand, South Africa, and the United States. No doubt one of the attractions was that the game could be played by both sexes; this also ensured a certain amount of adverse comment.\nIt is no coincidence that the game became popular at the same time as the cylinder lawn mower, since croquet can only be played well on a lawn that is flat and finely-cut.\nBy the late 1870s, however, croquet had been eclipsed by another fashionable game, lawn tennis, and many of the newly created croquet clubs, including the All England Club at Wimbledon, converted some or all of their lawns into tennis courts. There was a revival in the 1890s, but going forward croquet was always a minority sport, with national individual participation amounting to a few thousand players. The All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club still has a croquet lawn, but has not hosted any significant tournaments. Its championship was won 38 times by Bernard Neal. The English headquarters for the game is now in Cheltenham.\nThe earliest known reference to croquet in Scotland is the booklet \"The Game of Croquet, its Laws and Regulations\", which was published in the mid-1860s for the proprietor of Eglinton Castle, the Earl of Eglinton. On the page facing the title page is a picture of Eglinton Castle with a game of \"croquet\" in full swing.\nThe croquet lawn existed on the northern terrace, between Eglinton Castle and the Lugton Water. The 13th Earl developed a variation on croquet named Captain Moreton's Eglinton Castle croquet, which had small bells on the eight hoops \"to ring the changes\", two pegs, a double hoop with a bell, and two tunnels for the ball to pass through. In 1865, the 'Rules of the Eglinton Castle and Cassiobury Croquet' was published by Edmund Routledge. Several incomplete sets of this form of croquet are known to exist, and one complete set is still used for demonstration games in the West of Scotland.\nIn art and literature.\nCroquet is popularly believed to be viciously competitive. That may derive from the fact that (unlike in golf) players will often attempt to move their opponents' balls to unfavourable positions. However, purely negative play is rarely a winning strategy; successful players (in all versions other than golf croquet) will use all four balls to set up a break for themselves, rather than simply making the game as difficult as possible for their opponents.\nThe way croquet is depicted in paintings and books says much about popular perceptions of the game, though little about the reality of modern play.\nClubs.\nAbout 200 croquet clubs across the United States are members of the United States Croquet Association.\nMany colleges have croquet clubs as well, such as The University of Virginia, The University of Chicago, Pennsylvania State University, Bates College, SUNY New Paltz, Harvard University, and Dartmouth College. Notably, St. John's College and the US Naval Academy engage in a yearly match in Annapolis, Maryland. Both schools also compete at the collegiate level and the rivalry continues to be an Annapolis tradition, attracting thousands of spectators each April.\nIn England and Wales, there are around 170 clubs affiliated with the Croquet Association. The All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club at Wimbledon is famous for its lawn tennis tournament, but retains an active croquet section. There are clubs in many universities and colleges, with an annual varsity match being played between Oxford and Cambridge. With over 1800 participants, the 2011 Oxford University \"Cuppers\" (inter-college) tournament claimed to be not only the largest croquet tournament ever, but the largest sporting event in the university's history.\nThere are 112 clubs in New Zealand, affiliated with 19 associations. They are governed by Croquet New Zealand."}
