{"id": "8063", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8063", "title": "History of the Dominican Republic", "text": "The recorded history of the Dominican Republic began in 1492 when Christopher Columbus, working for the Crown of Castile, arrived at a large island in the western Atlantic Ocean, later known as the Caribbean. The native Ta\u00edno people, an Arawakan people, had inhabited the island during the pre-Columbian era, dividing it into five chiefdoms. They referred to the eastern part of the island as \"Quisqueya\", meaning 'mother of all lands.' Columbus claimed the island for Castile, naming it ('the Spanish Island'), which was later Latinized to Hispaniola.\nFollowing 25 years of Spanish occupation, the Ta\u00edno population in the Spanish-controlled regions of the island drastically decreased due to the Ta\u00edno genocide. With fewer than 50,000 survivors, those remaining intermixed with Spaniards, Africans, and others, leading to the formation of the present-day tripartite Dominican population. The area that would become the Dominican Republic remained the Captaincy General of Santo Domingo until 1821, except during the \"Era de Francia\", when it was a French colony from 1795 to 1815. It briefly became an independent state in 1821, known as the Republic of Spanish Haiti, until it was annexed and merged by Haiti into Republic of Haiti from 1822 to 1844.\nIn 1844, the Dominican Republic declared its independence, establishing the First Dominican Republic. The republic maintained its independence except for a brief annexation by Spain from 1861 to 1865, after which the Second Dominican Republic was established. The country later experienced its first occupation by the United States from 1916 to 1924, followed by the establishment of the Third Dominican Republic.\nDuring the 19th century, the Dominican Republic frequently engaged in conflicts involving the French, Haitians, Spanish, and internal factions. This period was characterized by a society heavily influenced by \"caudillos\", who exercised control over the nation as a personalised dictatorship. Between 1844 and 1914, the Dominican Republic underwent numerous leadership transitions, with 53 individuals assuming the presidency, although only three completed their terms. The country also saw the adoption of 19 constitutions, with many leaders obtaining power through military force. During this period, three presidents were assassinated: Jos\u00e9 Antonio Salcedo in 1864, Ulises Heureaux in 1899, and Ram\u00f3n C\u00e1ceres in 1911.\nIn 1930, the Dominican Republic came under the rule of Rafael Trujillo, a dictator who maintained control until his assassination in 1961. Following Trujillo's regime, Juan Bosch was democratically elected president in 1962 but was removed from office in a military coup d'\u00e9tat in 1963. The Dominican Civil War in 1965 lead to a U.S.-led intervention prompted by an uprising to restore Bosch to power and allegations of communist support for the coup. In 1966, Joaqu\u00edn Balaguer, a \"caudillo\", defeated Bosch in the presidential election and remained in power for 30 years. Due to U.S. pressure in response to flawed elections, Balaguer was compelled to shorten his term in 1996.\nSubsequent to this period, the Dominican Republic has conducted regular competitive elections, with opposition candidates successfully assuming the presidency, showing a transition towards more stable democracy.\nPre-European history.\nThe islands of the Caribbean were first settled around 6,000 years ago by hunter-gatherer peoples originating from Central America or northern South America. The Arawakan-speaking ancestors of the Ta\u00edno moved into the Caribbean from South America during the 1st millennium BC, reaching Hispaniola by around 600 AD. These Arawakan peoples engaged in farming, fishing, hunting and gathering, and the widespread production of ceramic goods. The estimates of Hispaniola's population in 1492 vary widely, including tens of thousands, 100,000, 300,000, and 400,000-2,000,000. Estimating how many people lived on the island in pre-Columbian times is challenging, as no accurate records exist. At the time of Columbus' arrival in 1492, the island's territory consisted of five Ta\u00edno chiefdoms: Mari\u00e9n, Magu\u00e1, Maguana, Jaragua, and Hig\u00fcey. These were ruled respectively by \"caciques\" Guacanagarix, Guarionex, Caonabo, Bohech\u00edo, and Cayacoa. The Ta\u00edno name for the entire island was either \"Ayiti\" (land of high mountains) or \"Quisqueya\" (mother of all lands).\nSpanish colony (1492\u20131795).\nArrival of the Spanish.\nChristopher Columbus reached the island of Hispa\u00f1ola on his first voyage, in December 1492. Guacanagar\u00ed, the chief who hosted Columbus and his men, treated them kindly and provided them with everything they desired. However, the Ta\u00ednos' egalitarian social system clashed with the Europeans' feudalist system, which had more rigid class structures. The Europeans believed the Ta\u00ednos to be either weak or misleading, and they began to treat the tribes with violence. Columbus successfully tempered this trend, and he and his men departed from Quisqueya, the Ta\u00ednos' name for the island, on good terms.\nAfter the sinking of the \"Santa Mar\u00eda\", Columbus established a small fort to support his claim to the island. The fort was called La Navidad because the shipwrecking and the founding of the fort occurred on Christmas Day. While Columbus was away, the garrison manning the fort was wracked by divisions that evolved into conflict. The more rapacious men began to terrorize the Ta\u00edno, the Ciguayo, and the Macorix peoples, which included attempts to take their women. Guacanagarix tried to reach an accommodation with the Spaniards; however, the Spaniards and some of his own people viewed him as weak. The Spaniards treated him with contempt, including the kidnapping of some of his wives. Fed up, the powerful Cacique Caonabo of the Maguana Chiefdom attacked the Europeans and destroyed La Navidad. Guacanagarix was dismayed by these events but did not try hard to aid the Europeans, probably hoping that the troublesome outsiders would never return.\nIn 1493, Columbus came back to the island on his second voyage and founded the first Spanish colony in the New World, the city of La Isabela. Isabela nearly failed because of hunger and disease. In 1496, Santo Domingo was built and became the new capital, and remains the oldest continuously inhabited European city in the Americas.\nAn estimated 400,000 Tainos living on the island were soon enslaved to work in gold mines. By 1508, their numbers had decreased to around 60,000 because of forced labor, hunger, disease, and the Ta\u00edno genocide. By 1535, only a few dozen were still alive.\nDuring this period, the colony's Spanish leadership changed several times. When Columbus departed on another exploration, Francisco de Bobadilla became governor. Settlers' allegations of mismanagement by Columbus helped create a tumultuous political situation. In 1502, Nicol\u00e1s de Ovando replaced de Bobadilla as governor, with an ambitious plan to expand Spanish influence in the region. It was he who dealt most brutally with the Ta\u00edno people. The Taino population declined by up to 95% in the century after the Spanish arrival, from a pre contact population of tens of thousands to 8,000,000. Many authors have described the treatment of the Taino in Hispaniola under the Spanish Empire as genocide.\nOne rebel, however, successfully fought back. Enriquillo led a group who fled to the mountains and attacked the Spanish repeatedly for fourteen years. The Spanish ultimately offered him a peace treaty and gave Enriquillo and his followers their own town in 1534.\nSixteenth century.\nIn 1501, the Spanish monarchs, Ferdinand I and Isabella, first granted permission to the colonists of the Caribbean to import African slaves, who began arriving to the island in 1503. In 1510, the first sizable shipment, consisting of 250 Black Ladinos, arrived in Hispaniola from Spain. Eight years later African-born slaves arrived in the West Indies. The Colony of Santo Domingo was organized as the Royal Audiencia of Santo Domingo in 1511. Sugar cane was introduced to Hispaniola from the Canary Islands, and the first sugar mill in the New World was established in 1516, on Hispaniola. The need for a labor force to meet the growing demands of sugar cane cultivation led to an exponential increase in the importation of slaves over the following two decades. The sugar mill owners soon formed a new colonial elite and convinced the Spanish king to allow them to elect the members of the Real Audiencia from their ranks. Poorer colonists subsisted by hunting the herds of wild cattle that roamed throughout the island and selling their hides.\nThe first major slave revolt in the Americas occurred in Santo Domingo on December 25, 1521, when enslaved Muslims of the Wolof nation led an uprising in the sugar plantation of admiral Don Diego Colon, son of Christopher Columbus. Many of these insurgents managed to escape to the mountains where they formed independent maroon communities, but the Admiral had a lot of the captured rebels hanged.\nWhile sugar cane dramatically increased Spain's earnings on the island, large numbers of the newly imported slaves fled into the nearly impassable mountain ranges in the island's interior, joining the growing communities of \"cimarr\u00f3nes\"\u2014literally, 'wild animals'. By the 1530s, \"cimarr\u00f3n\" bands had become so numerous that in rural areas the Spaniards could only safely travel outside their plantations in large armed groups. When Archdeacon Alonso de Castro toured Hispaniola in 1542, he estimated the maroon population at 2,000\u20133,000 persons, living mainly on the Cape of San Nicolas, in the Ciguayos, on the Samana peninsular, and on the Cape of Iguey. Latter that decade, there were also rebellions of enslaved people, led by Diego de Guzman, Diego de Campo, and Captain Lemba.\nBeginning in the 1520s, the Caribbean Sea was raided by increasingly numerous French pirates. In 1541, Spain authorized the construction of Santo Domingo's fortified wall, and in 1560 decided to restrict sea travel to enormous, well-armed convoys. In another move, which would destroy Hispaniola's sugar industry, in 1561 Havana, more strategically located in relation to the Gulf Stream, was selected as the designated stopping point for the merchant \"flotas,\" which had a royal monopoly on commerce with the Americas. In 1564, the island's main inland cities Santiago de los Caballeros and Concepci\u00f3n de la Vega were destroyed by an earthquake. In the 1560s, English privateers joined the French in regularly raiding Spanish shipping in the Americas.\nWith the conquest of the American mainland, Hispaniola quickly declined. Most Spanish colonists left for the silver-mines of Mexico and Peru, while new immigrants from Spain bypassed the island. Agriculture dwindled, new imports of slaves ceased, and white colonists, free blacks, and slaves alike lived in poverty, weakening the racial hierarchy and aiding \"intermixing,\" resulting in a population of predominantly mixed Spaniard, African, and Ta\u00edno descent. Except for the city of Santo Domingo, which managed to maintain some legal exports, Dominican ports were forced to rely on contraband trade, which, along with livestock, became the sole source of livelihood for the island dwellers.\nIn 1586, the privateer Francis Drake of England captured the city of Santo Domingo, collecting a ransom for its return to Spanish rule. In 1592, Christopher Newport of England attacked the town of Azua on the bay of Ocoa, which was taken and plundered.\nIn 1595, the Spanish, frustrated by the twenty-year rebellion of their Dutch subjects, closed their home ports to rebel shipping from the Netherlands cutting them off from the critical salt supplies necessary for their herring industry. The Dutch responded by sourcing new salt supplies from Spanish America where colonists were more than happy to trade. So large numbers of Dutch traders and buccaneers joined their English and French counterparts on the Spanish Main.\nSeventeenth century.\nIn 1605, Spain was infuriated that Spanish settlements on the northern and western coasts of the island were carrying out large scale and illegal trade with the Dutch, who were at that time fighting a war of independence against Spain in Europe, and the English, a very recent enemy state, and so decided to forcibly resettle the colony's inhabitants closer to the city of Santo Domingo. This action, known as the \"Devastaciones de Osorio\", proved disastrous; more than half of the resettled colonists died of starvation or disease, over 100,000 cattle were abandoned, and many slaves escaped. Five of the existing thirteen settlements on the island were brutally razed by Spanish troops \u2013 many of the inhabitants fought, escaped to the jungle, or fled to the safety of passing Dutch ships. The settlements of La Yaguana, and Bayaja, on the west and north coasts respectively of modern-day Haiti were burned, as were the settlements of Monte Cristi and Puerto Plata on the north coast and San Juan de la Maguana in the southwestern area of the modern-day Dominican Republic.\nFrench and English buccaneers took advantage of Spain's retreat into a corner of Hispaniola to settle the island of Tortuga, off the northwest coast of Hispaniola, in 1629. France established direct control in 1640, reorganizing it into an official colony and expanding to the north coast of Hispaniola itself, whose western end Spain ceded to France in 1697 under the Treaty of Ryswick.\nIn 1655, Oliver Cromwell of England dispatched a fleet, commanded by Admiral Sir William Penn, to capture Santo Domingo. After meeting heavy resistance, the English retreated. Despite the fact that the English were defeated in their attempt to capture the island, they nevertheless captured the nearby Spanish colony of Jamaica, and other foreign strongholds subsequently began to be established throughout the West Indies. Madrid sought to contest such encroachments on its own imperial control by using Santo Domingo as a forward military base, but Spanish power was by now too depleted to recapture lost colonies. The city itself was furthermore subjected to a smallpox epidemic, cacao blight, and hurricane in 1666; another storm two years later; a second epidemic in 1669; a third hurricane in September 1672; plus an earthquake in May 1673 that killed twenty-four residents.\nEighteenth century.\nThe House of Bourbon replaced the House of Habsburg in Spain in 1700 and introduced economic reforms that gradually began to revive trade in Santo Domingo. The crown progressively relaxed the rigid controls and restrictions on commerce between Spain and the colonies and among the colonies. The last \"flotas\" sailed in 1737; the monopoly port system was abolished shortly thereafter. By the middle of the century, the population was bolstered by emigration from the Canary Islands, resettling the northern part of the colony and planting tobacco in the Cibao Valley, and importation of slaves was renewed. The population of Santo Domingo grew from about 6,000 in 1737 to approximately 125,000 in 1790. Of this number, about 40,000 were white landowners, about 25,000 were mulatto freedmen, and some 60,000 were slaves. However, it remained poor and neglected, particularly in contrast with its western, French neighbor Saint-Domingue, which became the wealthiest colony in the New World and had half a million inhabitants.\nAs restrictions on colonial trade were relaxed, the colonial elites of St. Domingue offered the principal market for Santo Domingo's exports of beef, hides, mahogany, and tobacco. With the outbreak of the Haitian Revolution in 1791, the rich urban families linked to the colonial bureaucracy fled the island, while most of the rural \"hateros\" (cattle ranchers) remained, even though they lost their principal market. Spain saw in the unrest an opportunity to seize all, or part, of the western third of the island in an alliance of convenience with the rebellious slaves. But after the slaves and French reconciled, the Spanish suffered a setback, and in 1795, France gained control of the whole island under the Treaty of Basel.\nFrench occupation (1795\u20131809).\nIn 1801, Toussaint Louverture arrived in Santo Domingo, proclaiming the abolition of slavery on behalf of the French Republic. Shortly afterwards, Napoleon dispatched an army which subdued the whole island and ruled it for a few months. Mulattoes and blacks again rose up against these French in October 1802 and finally defeated them in November 1803. On 1 January 1804, the victors declared Saint-Domingue to be the independent republic of Haiti, the Ta\u00edno name for the entire island. Even after their defeat by the Haitians, a small French garrison remained in Santo Domingo. Slavery was reestablished and many of the \u00e9migr\u00e9 Spanish colonists returned. In 1805, after crowning himself Emperor, Jean-Jacques Dessalines invaded, reaching Santo Domingo before retreating in the face of a French naval squadron. In their retreat through the Cibao, the Haitians sacked the towns of Santiago and Moca, slaughtering most of their residents.\nThe French held on to the eastern part of the island until dealt a serious blow by the Dominican General Juan S\u00e1nchez Ram\u00edrez at the Battle of Palo Hincado on November 7, 1808. With help from the British Navy, Ram\u00edrez laid siege to the city of Santo Domingo. The French in the besieged city finally capitulated on July 9, 1809, initiating a twelve-year period of Spanish rule, known in Dominican history as \"Espa\u00f1a Boba\" ('the Foolish Spain').\nSpanish colony (1809\u20131821).\nThe population of the new Spanish colony stood at approximately 104,000. Of this number, about 30,000 were slaves, working predominantly on cattle ranches, and the rest a mixture of Spanish, taino and black. The European Spaniards were few, and consisted principally of Catalans and Canary Islanders.\nDuring this period in time, the Spanish crown wielded little to no influence in the colony of Santo Domingo. Some wealthy cattle ranchers had become leaders, and sought to bring control and order in the southeast of the colony where the \"law of machete\" ruled the land. On December 1, 1821, the former Captain general in charge of the colony, Jos\u00e9 N\u00fa\u00f1ez de C\u00e1ceres, influenced by all the Revolutions that were going on around him, finally decided to overthrow the Spanish government and proclaimed the independence of \"Spanish Haiti\".\nThe white and mulatto slave owners on the eastern part of the island\u2014recognizing their vulnerability both to Spanish and to Haitian attack and also seeking to maintain their slaves as property\u2014attempted to annex themselves to Gran Colombia. While this request was in transit, Jean-Pierre Boyer, the ruler of Haiti, invaded Santo Domingo on February 9, 1822, with a 10,000-strong army. Having no capacity to resist, N\u00fa\u00f1ez de C\u00e1ceres surrendered the capital.\nHaitian occupation (1822\u20131844).\nThe twenty-two-year Haitian occupation that followed is recalled by Dominicans as a period of brutal military rule, though the reality is more complex. It led to large-scale land expropriations and failed efforts to force production of export crops, impose military services, restrict the use of the Spanish language, and eliminate traditional customs such as cockfighting. It reinforced Dominicans' perceptions of themselves as different from Haitians in \"language, race, religion and domestic customs\". Yet, this was also a period that definitively ended slavery as an institution in the eastern part of the island.\nHaiti's constitution forbade whites from owning land, and the major landowning families were forcibly deprived of their properties. Most emigrated to the Spanish colonies of Cuba and Puerto Rico, or to independent Gran Colombia, usually with the encouragement of Haitian officials, who acquired their lands. The Haitians, who associated the Catholic Church with the French slave-masters who had exploited them before independence, confiscated all church property, deported all foreign clergy, and severed the ties of the remaining clergy to the Vatican. Santo Domingo's university, the oldest in the Western Hemisphere, lacking students, teachers, and resources, closed down. In order to receive diplomatic recognition from France and end the threat of a French invasion, Haiti was forced to pay an indemnity of 150 million francs to the former French colonists, which was subsequently lowered to 60 million francs, and Haiti imposed heavy taxes on the eastern part of the island. Since Haiti was unable to adequately provision its army, the occupying forces largely survived by commandeering or confiscating food and supplies at gunpoint.\nAttempts to redistribute land conflicted with the system of communal land tenure (\"terrenos comuneros\"), which had arisen with the ranching economy, and newly emancipated slaves resented being forced to grow cash crops under Boyer's \"Code Rural\". In rural areas, the Haitian administration was usually too inefficient to enforce its own laws. It was in the city of Santo Domingo that the effects of the occupation were most acutely felt, and it was there that the movement for independence originated.\nIndependence: First Republic (1844\u20131861).\nOn July 16, 1838, Juan Pablo Duarte together with Pedro Alejandrino Pina, Juan Isidro P\u00e9rez, Felipe Alfau, Benito Gonz\u00e1lez, F\u00e9lix Mar\u00eda Ruiz, Juan Nepumoceno Ravelo and Jacinto de la Concha founded a secret society called \"La Trinitaria\" to win independence from Haiti. A short time later, they were joined by Ram\u00f3n Mat\u00edas Mella, and Francisco del Rosario S\u00e1nchez. In 1843, they allied with a Haitian movement in overthrowing Boyer. Because they had revealed themselves as revolutionaries working for Dominican independence, the new Haitian president, Charles Rivi\u00e8re-H\u00e9rard, exiled or imprisoned the leading \"Trinitarios\" (Trinitarians). At the same time, Buenaventura B\u00e1ez, an Azua mahogany exporter and deputy in the Haitian National Assembly, was negotiating with the French Consul-General for the establishment of a French protectorate. In an uprising timed to preempt B\u00e1ez, on February 27, 1844, the Trinitarios declared independence from Haiti, expelling all Haitians and confiscating their property. The Trinitarios were backed by Pedro Santana, a wealthy cattle-rancher from El Seibo who commanded a private army of peons who worked on his estates.\nWar of Independence.\nOn March 10, 1844, Rivi\u00e8re-H\u00e9rard sent three columns totaling 30,000 troops into the Dominican Republic, but the Dominicans defeated the Haitian army by March 30. On April 15, three Dominican schooners defeated a Haitian brigantine and two Haitian schooners off the coast of Azua. As a result of these Haitian defeats, Rivi\u00e8re-H\u00e9rard was overthrown on May 3, leading to a temporary suspension of Haitian military operations. On June 17, 1845, Dominican troops invaded Haitian territory in retaliation for border raids, capturing two Haitian towns and establishing a fortified position. The Haitian army counterattacked on July 22, driving the invaders back across the frontier.\nOn August 6, 1845, Haitian President Luis Pierrot ordered an invasion of the Dominican Republic. On September 17, Dominican troops defeated the Haitian vanguard on the southern frontier, repelling a cavalry charge. Pierrot issued \"letters of marque\" against ships trading with the Dominican Republic and declared all Dominican ports closed on September 27, but lacked a navy to enforce this. Haitian privateers attacked Dominican merchant ships, damaging their trade.\nOn September 27, 1845, Dominican troops defeated a Haitian army at the battle of \"Beler,\" a frontier fortification, resulting in the deaths of three Haitian generals, including the army\u2019s commander. On October 28, another Haitian force attacked the frontier fort \"El Invencible\" but was repulsed after five hours of fighting. A Haitian squadron carrying troops to Puerto Plata was driven aground by bad weather on December 21, and the admiral and 148 others were taken prisoner. Shortly after announcing a new campaign for 1846, Pierrot was overthrown on February 27.\nFaustin Soulouque, now governing Haiti, launched a new invasion of the Dominican Republic. On March 21, 1849, Haitian soldiers attacked the Dominican garrison at Las Matas. Soulouque then captured San Juan, leaving Azua as the last Dominican stronghold before the capital. Since a Dominican flotilla dominated the coastal road with its cannons, he had to take a longer route to Azua and could not receive supplies from the sea. On April 2, President Manuel Jimenes called upon former President Santana to lead the defense. Azua fell to the Haitians on April 6, and a Dominican counterattack failed. On April 22, Santana defeated the Haitian army personally commanded by Soulouque during the two-day Battle of Las Carreras. The battle opened with a cannon barrage and devolved into hand-to-hand combat, with neither side taking prisoners.\nIn November 1849, President B\u00e1ez launched a naval offensive against Haiti. Entire villages along the Haitian coast were plundered and burned, and the crews of captured enemy ships were butchered without regard to age or gender. By late 1854, the Hispaniolan nations were at war again. In November, two Dominican ships captured a Haitian warship and bombarded two Haitian ports.\nIn November 1855, a force of 30,000 Haitian troops invaded the Dominican Republic along three routes: one from the north, one through the center, and one from the south. The Dominican frontier forces retreated in good order and the Dominican navy prevented the Haitians from receiving supplies by sea. On December 22, Dominican troops defeated the southern column at the Battle of Santom\u00e9, killing 695 Haitians, including General Antoine Pierrot. On January 27, 1856, some 8,000 Dominicans defeated 22,000 Haitians at the Battle of Sabana Larga near Dajab\u00f3n after eight hours of fighting, which came down to hand-to-hand combat. Thousands of Haitian dead or dying were abandoned on the battlefield as their forces retreated back across the border.\nFirst Republic.\nIn July 1844, Pedro Santana seized power from the liberal president Francisco del Rosario S\u00e1nchez in a military coup after Rosario S\u00e1nchez ousted the conservative Tom\u00e1s Bobadilla from power. Santana inaugurated a military dictatorship with Bobadilla as a member of his junta.\nThe Dominican Republic's first constitution was adopted on November 6, 1844. The state was commonly known as Santo Domingo in English until the early 20th century. It featured a presidential form of government with many liberal tendencies, but it was marred by Article 210, imposed by Santana on the constitutional assembly by force, giving him the privileges of a dictatorship until the war of independence was over. These privileges not only served him to win the war but also allowed him to persecute, execute and drive into exile his political opponents, among which Duarte was the most important. Santana imprisoned and ultimately exiled Duarte to Germany. Santana made the first martyr of the republic when he had Mar\u00eda Trinidad S\u00e1nchez executed for refusing to name \"conspirators\" against him.\nSantana used the ever-present threat of Haitian invasion as a justification for consolidating dictatorial powers. For the Dominican elite\u2014mostly landowners, merchants and priests\u2014the threat of re-annexation by more populous Haiti was sufficient to seek protection from a foreign power. Offering the deepwater harbor of Saman\u00e1 bay as bait, over the next two decades, negotiations were made with Britain, France, the United States and Spain to declare a protectorate over the country.\nWithout adequate roads, the regions of the Dominican Republic developed in isolation from one another. In the south, the economy was dominated by cattle-ranching (particularly in the southeastern savannah) and cutting mahogany and other hardwoods for export. This region retained a semi-feudal character, with little commercial agriculture, the \"hacienda\" as the dominant social unit, and the majority of the population living at a subsistence level. In the Cibao Valley, the nation's richest farmland, peasants supplemented their subsistence crops by growing tobacco for export, mainly to Germany. Tobacco required less land than cattle ranching and was mainly grown by smallholders, who relied on itinerant traders to transport their crops to Puerto Plata and Monte Cristi. Santana antagonized the Cibao farmers, enriching himself and his supporters at their expense by resorting to multiple peso printings that allowed him to buy their crops for a fraction of their value.\nIn 1848, Santana was forced to resign and was succeeded by his vice-president, Manuel Jimenes. After returning to lead Dominican forces against a new Haitian invasion in 1849, Santana marched on Santo Domingo, deposing Jimenes. At his behest, Congress elected Buenaventura B\u00e1ez as president. In 1853, Santana was elected president for his second term, forcing B\u00e1ez into exile. After repulsing the last Haitian invasion, Santana negotiated a treaty leasing a portion of Saman\u00e1 Peninsula to a U.S. company; popular opposition forced him to abdicate, enabling B\u00e1ez to return and seize power. With the treasury depleted, B\u00e1ez printed eighteen million uninsured pesos, purchasing the 1857 tobacco crop with this currency and exporting it for hard cash at immense profit to himself and his followers. The Cibanian tobacco planters, who were ruined when inflation ensued, revolted and formed a new government headed by Jos\u00e9 Desiderio Valverde and headquartered in Santiago de los Caballeros. In July 1857, General Juan Luis Franco Bid\u00f3 besieged Santo Domingo. The Cibao-based government declared an amnesty to exiles and Santana returned and managed to replace Franco Bid\u00f3 in September 1857. After a year of civil war, Santana captured Santo Domingo in June 1858, overthrew both B\u00e1ez and Valverde and installed himself as president.\nSpanish colony (1861\u20131865).\nPedro Santana inherited a bankrupt government on the brink of collapse and initiated negotiations with Queen Isabella II of Spain to have the eastern two-thirds of the island reconverted into a Spanish overseas territory. The U.S. Civil War rendered the United States incapable of enforcing the Monroe Doctrine. In March 1861, Santana officially restored the Dominican Republic to Spain. This move was widely rejected and there were several failed uprisings against Spanish rule. On July 4, 1861, former President Francisco del Rosario S\u00e1nchez was captured and executed by Santana after leading a failed invasion of Santo Domingo from Haiti. \nSantana, who had been given the title of Marquess of Las Carreras by Queen Isabella II, thought he could perpetrate a fraud on the Spaniards similar to those he had carried out in the Cibao. When negotiations concluded and Spain agreed on an amortization rate for Dominican pesos, Santana printed 33 million more, so Spain would be forced to provide far more money to him and his associates, to whom he distributed the pesos as gifts. Under the annexation terms, General Santana retained military command of the new Spanish province, answering only to Spain's regional commander in Puerto Rico, but it soon became obvious that Spanish authorities planned to deprive him of his power. His associates were removed from military positions, the 33 million pesos he printed were refused for amortization, and he was ultimately deposed in July 1862 and replaced with Felipe Ribero y Lemoine.\nBy 1863, uprisings had spread throughout the colony, leading to the outbreak of guerrilla warfare. In February, the Spanish authorities declared a state of siege in the territory. In April, the Spanish Army defeated the Dominican forces led by General Lucas de Pe\u00f1a at Cibao. In order to reinforce their position with an auxiliary force to keep public order in the cities, a militia named Volunteers was created in Santo Domingo City, following the example of the militia of the same name previously created in Cuba and Puerto Rico.\nWar of Restoration.\nOn August 16, 1863, fourteen Dominican dissidents led by Santiago Rodr\u00edguez crossed the northeastern border into Spanish-held territory and called for the population to rise against the invaders. They defeated a small Spanish detachment, and the insurrection quickly spread to the outskirts of the capital. On September 9, Spanish reinforcements consisting of two battalions arrived in Puerto Plata. The Spanish garrison of Santiago evacuated Fort San Luis on September 13 and marched toward Puerto Plata. During their three-day march, they were attacked by the Dominicans, resulting in 1,200 Spanish troops killed and wounded. Santana returned and led an army mostly composed of mercenaries against the rebels at Cibao.\nOn September 14, the insurgents established a provisional government in Santiago led by General Jos\u00e9 Antonio Salcedo, which declared Santana a traitor and ordered that he be shot on sight. Santana's march stalled at Monte Plata, where rebel forces under General Gregorio Luper\u00f3n harassed his troops, depleting their strength. The Dominicans captured Santana's entire supply train, along with two Spanish generals and about one hundred Spanish soldiers at Yamas\u00e1. Many of Santana's troops deserted, and the Spanish authorities refused to send reinforcements. Santana subsequently withdrew to El Seibo.\nThe Spanish soldiers in the forts of Puerto Plata and Saman\u00e1 faced deteriorating conditions. The onset of the rainy season brought widespread sickness. Meanwhile, the Dominicans bombarded Puerto Plata. On October 4, 1863, both the Spaniards and Dominicans pillaged the town. A fight ensued, with 600 Spaniards ultimately driving the Dominicans out of the town, aided by the fort's cannons. In December, a Spanish expedition was launched along the southern seacoast to expel rebel groups weakened by internal conflicts. The Spanish forces successfully drove the rebels from several towns; however, the capture of Azua proved costly, resulting in significant Spanish casualties over two months of fighting. Ultimately, the rebels retreated into Haiti, executing 35 Spanish prisoners during their withdrawal. The Captain-General of Santo Domingo, Jos\u00e9 de la G\u00e1ndara, adopted a strategy of occupying the northern ports to isolate the dissident Dominican government in Santiago from outside support. However, he overlooked his forces' lack of supplies and poor equipment, as many rifles and cannons were obsolete, and several warships were unseaworthy.\nIn May 1864, a 6,000-strong Spanish force captured the town of Monte Cristi on the northern coast, which was fortified with forts and trenches. Next, La G\u00e1ndara attempted to subdue the rebels between Monte Cristi and Santiago, but the Dominicans resorted to hit-and-run tactics and intercepted many supplies intended for La G\u00e1ndara. The only victory in the campaign was the capture of Monte Cristi, achieved at the cost of heavy casualties, including the wounding of Field Marshal Primo de Rivera. On December 4, 1864, southern forces led by Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Cabral defeated the Spanish in an engagement at Neiba, marking the first time that the Dominicans achieved victory against the Spanish in a conventional battle.\nConfined to the major towns, the Spanish Army was unable to defeat the guerillas or contain the insurrection, and suffered heavy losses due to yellow fever; by the end of the occupation, over 12,000 Spanish troops had died from the disease. Spanish colonial authorities encouraged Queen Isabella II to abandon the island, seeing the occupation as a nonsensical waste of troops and money. However, the rebels were in a state of political disarray and proved unable to present a cohesive set of demands.\nIn October 1864, the first president of the provisional government, Pepillo Salcedo (allied with B\u00e1ez), was assassinated. He had been deposed by General Gaspar Polanco in September 1864, who, in turn, was deposed by General Antonio Pimentel three months later after a failed attack on the Spanish at Monte Cristi. The rebels formalized their provisional rule by holding a national convention in February 1865, which enacted a new constitution, but the new government exerted little authority over the various regional guerrilla \"caudillos\", who were largely independent of one another. Unable to extract concessions from the disorganized rebels, when the American Civil War ended, in March 1865, Queen Isabella annulled the annexation and independence was restored, with the last Spanish troops departing by July.\nRestoration: Second Republic (1865\u20131916).\nBy the time the Spanish departed, most of the main towns lay in ruins and the island was divided among several dozen \"caudillos\". Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Cabral controlled most of Barahona and the southwest with the support of B\u00e1ez's mahogany-exporting partners, while cattle rancher Ces\u00e1reo Guillermo assembled a coalition of former \"Santanista\" generals in the southeast, and Gregorio Luper\u00f3n controlled the north coast.\nFrom the Spanish withdrawal to 1879, there were twenty-one changes of government and at least fifty military uprisings. In the course of these conflicts, two parties emerged. The Partido Rojo (Literally \"Red Party\") represented the southern cattle ranching latifundia and mahogany-exporting interests, as well as the artisans and laborers of Santo Domingo, and was dominated by B\u00e1ez, who continued to seek annexation by a foreign power. The Partido Azul (literally \"Blue Party\"), led by Luper\u00f3n, represented the tobacco farmers and merchants of the Cibao and Puerto Plata and was nationalist and liberal in orientation. During these wars, the small and corrupt national army was far outnumbered by militias organized and maintained by local \"caudillos\" who set themselves up as provincial governors. These militias were filled out by poor farmers or landless plantation workers impressed into service who usually took up banditry when not fighting in revolution.\nWithin a month of the nationalist victory, Cabral, whose troops were the first to enter Santo Domingo, ousted Pimentel, but a few weeks later General Guillermo led a rebellion in support of B\u00e1ez, forcing Cabral to resign and allowing B\u00e1ez to retake the presidency in October. B\u00e1ez was overthrown by the Cibao farmers under Luper\u00f3n, leader of the Partido Azul, the following spring, but Luper\u00f3n's allies turned on each other and Cabral reinstalled himself as president in a coup in 1867. After bringing several \"Azules\" (\"Blues\") into his cabinet the \"Rojos\" (\"Reds\") revolted, returning B\u00e1ez to power. In 1869, B\u00e1ez negotiated a treaty of annexation with the United States. Supported by U.S. Secretary of State William Seward, who hoped to establish a Navy base at Saman\u00e1, in 1871 the treaty was defeated in the United States Senate through the efforts of abolitionist Senator Charles Sumner.\nIn 1874, the \"Rojo\" governor of Puerto Plata, Ignacio Maria Gonz\u00e1lez Sant\u00edn, staged a coup in support of an \"Azul\" rebellion but was deposed by the \"Azules\" two years later. In February 1876, Ulises Espaillat, backed by Luper\u00f3n, was named president, but ten months later troops loyal to B\u00e1ez returned him to power. One year later, a new rebellion allowed Gonz\u00e1lez to seize power, only to be deposed by Ces\u00e1reo Guillermo in September 1878, who was in turn deposed by Luper\u00f3n in December 1879. Ruling the country from his hometown of Puerto Plata, enjoying an economic boom due to increased tobacco exports to Germany, Luper\u00f3n enacted a new constitution setting a two-year presidential term limit and providing for direct elections, suspended the semi-formal system of bribes and initiated construction on the nation's first railroad, linking the town of La Vega with the port of S\u00e1nchez on Saman\u00e1 Bay.\nThe Ten Years' War in Cuba brought Cuban sugar planters to the country in search of new lands and security from the insurrection that freed their slaves and destroyed their property. Most settled in the southeastern coastal plain, and, with assistance from Luper\u00f3n's government, built the nation's first mechanized sugar mills. They were later joined by Italians, Germans, Puerto Ricans and Americans in forming the nucleus of the Dominican sugar bourgeoisie, marrying into prominent families to solidify their social position. Disruptions in global production caused by the Ten Years' War, the American Civil War and the Franco-Prussian War allowed the Dominican Republic to become a major sugar exporter. Over the following two decades, sugar surpassed tobacco as the leading export, with the former fishing hamlets of San Pedro de Macor\u00eds and La Romana transformed into thriving ports. To meet their need for better transportation, over 300 miles of private rail-lines were built by and serving the sugar plantations by 1897.\nAn 1884 slump in prices led to a wage freeze, and a subsequent labor shortage was filled by migrant workers from the Leeward Islands\u2014the Virgin Islands, St. Kitts and Nevis, Anguilla, and Antigua (referred to by Dominicans as \"cocolo\"s). These English-speaking blacks were often victims of racism, but many remained in the country, finding work as stevedores and in railroad construction and sugar refineries.\nUlises Heureaux and U.S. protectorate.\nAllying with the emerging sugar interests, the dictatorship of General Ulises Heureaux, who was popularly known as Lil\u00eds, brought unprecedented stability to the island through an iron-fisted rule that lasted almost two decades. The son of a Haitian father and a mother from St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, Lil\u00eds was distinguished by his blackness from most Dominican political leaders, with the exception of Luper\u00f3n. He served as President 1882\u20131883, 1887, and 1889\u20131899, wielding power through a series of puppet presidents when not occupying the office. Incorporating both \"Rojos\" and \"Azules\" into his government, he developed an extensive network of spies and informants to crush potential opposition. His government undertook a number of major infrastructure projects, including the electrification of Santo Domingo, the beginning of telephone and telegraph service, the construction of a bridge over the Ozama River, and the completion of a single-track railroad linking Santiago and Puerto Plata, financed by the Amsterdam-based Westendorp Co.\nLil\u00eds's dictatorship was dependent upon heavy borrowing from European and American banks to enrich himself, stabilize the existing debt, strengthen the bribe system, pay for the army, finance infrastructural development and help set up sugar mills. However, sugar prices underwent a steep decline in the last two decades of the 19th century. When the Westendorp Co. went bankrupt in 1893, he was forced to mortgage the nation's customs fees, the main source of government revenues, to a New York financial firm called the San Domingo Improvement Co. (SDIC), which took over its railroad contracts and the claims of its European bondholders in exchange for two loans, one of $1.2 million and the other of \u00a32 million.\nAs the growing public debt made it impossible to maintain his political machine, Heureaux relied on secret loans from the SDIC, sugar planters and local merchants. In 1897, with his government virtually bankrupt, Lil\u00eds printed five million uninsured pesos, known as \"papeletas de Lil\u00eds\", ruining most Dominican merchants and inspiring a conspiracy that ended in his death. In 1899, when Lil\u00eds was assassinated by the Cibao tobacco merchants whom he had been begging for a loan, the national debt was over $35 million, fifteen times the annual budget.\nThe six years after Lil\u00eds's death witnessed four revolutions and five different presidents. The Cibao politicians who had conspired against Heureaux\u2014Juan Isidro Jimenes, the nation's wealthiest tobacco planter, and General Horacio V\u00e1squez\u2014after being named president and vice-president, quickly fell out over the division of spoils among their supporters, the \"Jimenistas\" and \"Horacistas\".\nTroops loyal to V\u00e1squez overthrew Jimenes in 1903, but V\u00e1squez was deposed by Jimenista General Alejandro Woss y Gil, who seized power for himself. The Jimenistas toppled his government, but their leader, Carlos Morales, refused to return power to Jimenes, allying with the Horacistas, and he soon faced a new revolt by his betrayed Jimenista allies. During the revolt, American warships bombarded insurgents in Santo Domingo after they insulted the United States flag and killed a U.S. Navy sailor.\nWith the nation on the brink of defaulting, France, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands sent warships to Santo Domingo to press the claims of their nationals. In order to preempt military intervention, United States president Theodore Roosevelt introduced the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, declaring that the United States would assume responsibility for ensuring that the nations of Latin America met their financial obligations.\nIn January 1905, under this corollary, the United States assumed administration of the Dominican Republic's customs. Under the terms of this agreement, a Receiver-General, appointed by the U.S. president, kept 55% of total revenues to pay off foreign claimants, while remitting 45% to the Dominican government. After two years, the nation's external debt was reduced from $40 million to $17 million. In 1907, this agreement was converted into a treaty, transferring control over customs receivership to the U.S. Bureau of Insular Affairs and providing a loan of $20 million from a New York bank as payment for outstanding claims, making the United States the Dominican Republic's only foreign creditor. In 1905, the Dominican Peso was replaced by the U.S. Dollar.\nIn 1906, Morales resigned, and Horacista vice-president Ram\u00f3n C\u00e1ceres became president. After suppressing a rebellion in the northwest by Jimenista General Desiderio Arias, his government brought political stability and renewed economic growth, aided by new American investment in the sugar industry.\nHowever, his assassination in 1911, for which Morales and Arias were at least indirectly responsible, once again plunged the republic into chaos. For two months, executive power was held by a civilian junta dominated by the chief of the army, General Alfredo Victoria. The surplus of more than 4 million pesos left by C\u00e1ceres was quickly spent to suppress a series of insurrections. He forced Congress to elect his uncle, Eladio Victoria, as president, but the latter was soon replaced by the neutral Archbishop Adolfo Nouel. After four months, Nouel resigned and was succeeded by Horacista Congressman Jos\u00e9 Bordas Valdez, who aligned with Arias and the Jimenistas to maintain power. \nIn 1913, V\u00e1squez returned from exile in Puerto Rico to lead a new rebellion. In June 1914, U.S. President Woodrow Wilson issued an ultimatum for the two sides to end hostilities and agree on a new president, or have the United States impose one. After the provisional presidency of Ram\u00f3n B\u00e1ez, Jimenes was elected in October, and soon faced new demands, including the appointment of an American director of public works and financial advisor and the creation of a new military force commanded by U.S. officers. The Dominican Congress rejected these demands and began impeachment proceedings against Jimenes.\nThe United States occupied Haiti in July 1915, with the implicit threat that the Dominican Republic might be next. Jimenes's Minister of War Desiderio Arias staged a coup d'\u00e9tat in April 1916, providing a pretext for the United States to occupy the Dominican Republic.\nUnited States occupation (1916\u201324).\nConventional campaign.\nUnited States Marines landed in Santo Domingo on May 5, 1916, and seized Fort San Ger\u00f3nimo. Jimenes resigned on May 7 rather than comply with U.S. demands for more political and economic control. On May 13, an admiral demanded that Arias, entrenched in Fort Ozama, disband his army and surrender his weapons, but Arias and his supporters chose to leave the city rather than comply. On June 1, following a bombardment, Marines occupied Monte Cristi and Puerto Plata. The Marines faced opposition at the second port from supporters of General Arias and fought their way ashore, capturing Fort San Felipe.\nOn June 26, a column of Marines under Colonel Joseph H. Pendleton marched from Monte Cristi toward Arias's stronghold in Santiago. The following day, the column encountered a strong defensive position on Las Trencheras Ridge. Supported by artillery, the Marines attacked and overran the position. The rebels fell back to a second defensive line but could not hold that either. A week later, the Marines encountered another entrenched rebel force at Guayacanas, where the rebels maintained single-shot fire against the Marines' automatic weapons before being driven off. On July 5, a peace delegation from Santiago met with the Marines and handed over the city, while General Arias surrendered to the Dominican governor of Santiago. Three Marines were killed and fifteen wounded. The U.S. then extended the occupation to the inland cities of Moca and La Vega.\nOccupation.\nThe Dominican Congress elected Dr. Francisco Henr\u00edquez y Carvajal as president, but in November, after he refused to meet the U.S. demands, Wilson announced the imposition of a U.S. military government, with Rear Admiral Harry Shepard Knapp as Military Governor.\nAt San Francisco de Macor\u00eds, Governor Juan P\u00e9rez, a supporter of Arias, refused to recognize the U.S. military government. Using released prisoners, he prepared to defend the old Spanish fort. On November 29, U.S. Marine Lt. Ernest C. Williams, whose detachment was billeted in San Francisco, charged the closing gates of the fort at nightfall with twelve Marines. Eight were shot down; the others, including Williams, forced their way in and seized the old structure. Another Marine detachment seized the police station, and reinforcements soon suppressed the uprising.\nThe American military government implemented many of the institutional reforms carried out in the United States during the Progressive Era, including reorganization of the tax system, accounting and administration, expansion of primary education, the creation of a nationwide police force to unify the country, and the construction of a national system of roads, including a highway linking Santiago to Santo Domingo.\nThe military government, unable to win the backing of any prominent Dominican political leaders, imposed strict censorship laws and imprisoned critics of the occupation. In 1920, U.S. authorities enacted a Land Registration Act, which broke up the \"terrenos comuneros\" and dispossessed thousands of peasants who lacked formal titles to the lands they occupied, while legalizing false titles held by the sugar companies. \nIn the southeast, dispossessed peasants formed armed bands, called \"gavilleros\", engaging in guerrilla warfare for years in Hato Mayor and El Seibo. At any given time, the Marines faced eight to twelve such bands each composed of several hundred followers. The guerrillas benefited from a superior knowledge of the terrain and the support of the local population, and the Marines relied on superior firepower. However, rivalries between various gavilleros often led them to fight against one another, and even cooperate with occupation authorities. In addition, cultural schisms between the \"campesinos\" (i.e. rural people, or peasants) and city dwellers prevented the guerrillas from cooperating with the urban middle-class nationalist movement.\nIn what was referred to as \"la danza de los millones\", with the destruction of European sugar-beet farms during World War I, sugar prices rose to their highest level in history, from $5.50 in 1914 to $22.50 per pound in 1920. Dominican sugar exports increased from 122,642 tons in 1916 to 158,803 tons in 1920, earning a record $45.3 million. However, European beet sugar production quickly recovered, which, coupled with the growth of global sugar cane production, glutted the world market, causing prices to plummet to only $2.00 by the end of 1921. This crisis drove many of the local sugar planters into bankruptcy, allowing large U.S. conglomerates to dominate the sugar industry. By 1926, only twenty-one major estates remained, occupying an estimated . Of these, twelve U.S.-owned companies owned more than 81% of this total area. While the foreign planters who had built the sugar industry integrated into Dominican society, these corporations expatriated their profits to the United States. As prices declined, sugar estates increasingly relied on Haitian laborers. This was facilitated by the military government's introduction of regulated contract labor, the growth of sugar production in the southwest, near the Haitian border, and a series of strikes by \"cocolo\" cane cutters organized by the Universal Negro Improvement Association.\nWithdrawal.\nIn the 1920 United States presidential election Republican candidate Warren Harding criticized the occupation and promised eventual U.S. withdrawal. While Jimenes and V\u00e1squez sought concessions from the United States, the collapse of sugar prices discredited the military government and gave rise to a new nationalist political organization, the Dominican National Union, led by Dr. Henr\u00edquez from exile in Santiago de Cuba, Cuba, which demanded unconditional withdrawal. They formed alliances with frustrated nationalists in Puerto Rico and Cuba, as well as critics of the occupation in the United States itself, most notably \"The Nation\" and the Haiti-San Domingo Independence Society. In May 1922, a Dominican lawyer, Francisco Peynado, went to Washington, D.C. and negotiated what became known as the Hughes\u2013Peynado Plan. It stipulated the immediate establishment of a provisional government pending elections, approval of all laws enacted by the U.S. military government, and the continuation of the 1907 treaty until all the Dominican Republic's foreign debts had been settled. On October 1, Juan Bautista Vicini, the son of a wealthy Italian immigrant sugar planter, was named provisional president, and the process of U.S. withdrawal began. \nU.S. forces withdrew on September 18, 1924. The principal legacy of the occupation was the creation of a National Police Force, used by the Marines to help fight against the various guerrillas, and later the main vehicle for the rise of Rafael Trujillo. Hundreds of Dominicans and 144 U.S. Marines were killed during the occupation. (Forty U.S. sailors died separately when a hurricane wrecked their armored cruiser on Santo Domingo's rocky shore.)\nThe rise and fall of Trujillo: Third Republic (1924\u201365).\nHoracio V\u00e1squez 1924\u20131930.\nThe occupation ended in 1924, with a democratically elected government under president V\u00e1squez. The V\u00e1squez administration brought great social and economic prosperity to the country and respected political and civil rights. Rising export commodity prices and government borrowing allowed the funding of public works projects and the expansion and modernization of Santo Domingo.\nThough considered to be a relatively principled man, V\u00e1squez had risen amid many years of political infighting. In a move directed against his chief opponent Federico Velasquez, in 1927 V\u00e1squez agreed to have his term extended from four to six years. The change was approved by the Dominican Congress, but was of debatable legality; \"its enactment effectively invalidated the constitution of 1924 that V\u00e1squez had previously sworn to uphold.\" V\u00e1squez also removed the prohibition against presidential reelection and postulated himself for another term in elections to be held in May 1930. However, his actions had by then led to doubts that the contest could be fair. Furthermore, these elections took place amid economic problems, as the Great Depression had dropped sugar prices to less than one dollar per pound.\nIn February, a revolution was proclaimed in Santiago by a lawyer named Rafael Estrella Ure\u00f1a. When the commander of the \"Guardia Nacional Dominicana\" (the new designation of the armed force created under the Occupation), Rafael Leonidas Trujillo Molina, ordered his troops to remain in their barracks, the sick and aging V\u00e1squez was forced into exile and Estrella proclaimed provisional president. In May, Trujillo was elected with 95% of the vote, having used the army to harass and intimidate electoral personnel and potential opponents. After his inauguration in August, at his request, the Dominican Congress proclaimed the beginning of the 'Era of Trujillo'.\nThe era of Trujillo 1931\u20131961.\nTrujillo established absolute political control while promoting economic development\u2014from which mainly he and his supporters benefitted\u2014and severe repression of domestic human rights. Trujillo treated his political party, \"El Partido Dominicano\" (The Dominican Party), as a rubber-stamp for his decisions. The true source of his power was the \"Guardia Nacional\"\u2014larger, better armed, and more centrally controlled than any military force in the nation's history. By disbanding the regional militias, the Marines eliminated the main source of potential opposition, giving the Guard \"a virtual monopoly on power\". By 1940, Dominican military spending was 21% of the national budget. At the same time, he developed an elaborate system of espionage agencies. By the late 1950s, there were at least seven categories of intelligence agencies, spying on each other as well as the public. All citizens were required to carry identification cards and good-conduct passes from the secret police.\nObsessed with adulation, Trujillo promoted an extravagant cult of personality. When a hurricane struck Santo Domingo in 1930, killing 8,000 people, he rebuilt the city and renamed it \"Ciudad Trujillo\": \"Trujillo City\"; he also renamed the country's and the Caribbean's highest mountain, Pico Duarte (Duarte Peak), \"Pico Trujillo\". Over 1,800 statues of Trujillo were built, and all public works projects were required to have a plaque with the inscription \"Era of Trujillo, Benefactor of the Fatherland\".\nAs sugar estates turned to Haiti for seasonal migrant labor, increasing numbers settled in the Dominican Republic permanently. The census of 1920, conducted by the U.S. occupation government, gave a total of 28,258 Haitians living in the country; by 1935 there were 52,657. In October 1937, Trujillo ordered the massacre of an estimated 17,000 to 35,000 Haitian men, women, and children living in the border region of the Dominican Republic. Over the course of five days, Dominican troops killed Haitians with guns, machetes, clubs, and knives. The massacre was the result of a new policy which Trujillo called the 'Dominicanisation of the frontier'. Place names along the border were changed from Creole and French to Spanish, the practice of Voodoo was outlawed, quotas were imposed on the percentage of foreign workers that companies could hire, and a law was passed preventing Haitian workers from remaining after the sugar harvest.\nAlthough Trujillo sought to emulate Generalissimo Francisco Franco, he welcomed Spanish Republican refugees following the Spanish Civil War. During the Holocaust in the Second World War, the Dominican Republic took in many Jews fleeing Hitler who had been refused entry by other countries. The Jews settled in Sosua. These decisions arose from a policy of \"blanquismo\", closely connected with anti-Haitian xenophobia, which sought to add more light-skinned individuals to the Dominican population by promoting immigration from Europe. As part of the Good Neighbor policy, in 1940, the U.S. State Department signed a treaty with Trujillo relinquishing control over the nation's customs.\nWhen the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, Trujillo followed the United States in declaring war on the Axis powers, although the Dominican Republic did not have any participation in the war. Nazi submarines operating in the Caribbean torpedoed and sank two Dominican merchant vessels that Trujillo had named after himself\u2014the steamers \"San Rafael\" and \"Presidente Trujillo\", killing twenty-six Dominican sailors. Nazi submarines also destroyed four Dominican schooners. After the war, Trujillo sought military aid from the United States but was denied. Trujillo decided to establish his own arms factory. This move allowed the Dominican Republic to become self-sufficient in producing firearms. In the 1950s, Trujillo's air force had 156 aircraft, including fighters, B-17 bombers, and B-26 Marauder bombers. His navy comprised two destroyers and eight frigates. During the Cold War, he maintained close ties to the United States, declaring himself the world's \"Number One Anticommunist\" and becoming the first Latin American President to sign a Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement with the United States.\nTrujillo and his family established a near-monopoly over the national economy. By the time of his death, he had accumulated a fortune of around $800 million ($8.2 billion in today's money); he and his family owned 50\u201360% of the arable land, some , and Trujillo-owned businesses accounted for 80% of the commercial activity in the capital. He exploited nationalist sentiment to purchase most of the nation's sugar plantations and refineries from U.S. corporations; operated monopolies on salt, rice, milk, cement, tobacco, coffee, and insurance; owned two large banks, several hotels, port facilities, an airline and shipping line; deducted 10% of all public employees' salaries (ostensibly for his party); and received a portion of prostitution revenues.\nWorld War II brought increased demand for Dominican exports, and the 1940s and early 1950s witnessed economic growth and considerable expansion of the national infrastructure. During this period, the capital city was transformed from merely an administrative center to the national center of shipping and industry, although \"it was hardly coincidental that new roads often led to Trujillo's plantations and factories, and new harbors benefited Trujillo's shipping and export enterprises.\" Mismanagement and corruption resulted in major economic problems. By the end of the 1950s, the economy was deteriorating because of a combination of overspending on a festival to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the regime, overspending to purchase privately owned sugar mills and electricity plants, and a decision to make a major investment in state sugar production that proved economically unsuccessful.\nOn June 14, 1959, Dominican exiles, sponsored by the Cuban government, launched an invasion of the Dominican Republic from Cuba, landing by plane at Constanza, where they were quickly defeated by the Anti-Communist Foreign Legion of the Caribbean. A week later, another group of invaders in two yachts were intercepted on the north coast, where Trujillo's planes killed most of the invaders. A few survivors managed to swim to the shore and escape into the forest, but the military employed napalm to get them out. Of a count of 224 invaders, 217 were killed and seven captured. The leaders of the invasion were taken aboard a Dominican Air Force plane and then pushed out in mid-air, falling to their deaths. The invasion force consisted of Dominicans, Cubans, Venezuelans, Spaniards, Guatemalans, and Americans. In October 1960, Trujillo supported 1,000 Cuban insurgents in the Escambray Rebellion, but they were defeated by the Cuban government.\nIn 1957, Trujillo created S.I.M. (Military Intelligence Service), a secret police and death squad, headed by Johnny Abbes Garc\u00eda, who briefly operated in Cuba, Mexico, Guatemala, New York, Costa Rica, and Venezuela. On June 24, 1960, as Venezuelan president R\u00f3mulo Betancourt was en route to preside over a military parade in Caracas, S.I.M. agents detonated nearly 30\u00a0kg of explosives packed into two suitcases within a parked car nearby; Betancourt was injured, and Colonel Ram\u00f3n Armas Perez, the chauffeur, and a bystander were killed. Investigation revealed that the ammonium nitrate bomb had been assembled in Ciudad Trujillo and that the operation was orchestrated by Abbes. In August 1960, the Organization of American States (OAS) imposed economic sanctions against the Dominican Republic as a result of Trujillo's complicity in the nearly successful assassination attempt.\nThe United States broke diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic on August 26, 1960, and in January 1961 suspended the export of trucks, parts, crude oil, gasoline and other petroleum products. U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower also took advantage of OAS sanctions to cut drastically purchases of Dominican sugar. This action ultimately cost the Dominican Republic almost $22,000,000 in lost revenues at a time when its economy was in a rapid decline. Trujillo threatened to align with the Communist world in response to U.S. and Latin American rejection of his regime. La Voz Dominicana and Radio Caribe began attacking the U.S. in Marxian terms, and the Dominican Communist Party was legalized. The United States government enlisted the CIA to devise a plan to kill Trujillo.\nA group of Dominican dissidents killed Trujillo in a car chase on the way to his country villa near San Crist\u00f3bal on May 30, 1961. The group, led by General Juan Tom\u00e1s D\u00edaz Quezada, fired nearly thirty bullets into Trujillo's blue 1957 Chevrolet Bel Air. Trujillo's chauffeur attempted to return fire with a machine gun. Badly wounded, Trujillo exited the car, searching for the assassins, and was shot dead on the spot. The sanctions remained in force after Trujillo's assassination. His son Ramfis took charge and rounded up the conspirators, who were executed. Among the victims was General Ren\u00e9 Rom\u00e1n Fern\u00e1ndez, secretary of the armed forces and an in-law of Trujillo, who was tortured in the electric chair before being executed with a submachine gun.\nIn November 1961, the military plot of the Rebellion of the Pilots forced the Trujillo family into exile, fleeing to France, and the heretofore puppet-president Joaqu\u00edn Balaguer assumed effective power.\nThe post-Trujillo instability 1961\u20131965.\nAt the insistence of the United States, Balaguer was forced to share power with a seven-member Council of State, established on January 1, 1962, and including moderate members of the opposition. OAS sanctions were lifted January 4, and, after an attempted coup, Balaguer resigned and went into exile on January 16. The reorganized Council of State, under President Rafael Filiberto Bonnelly headed the Dominican government until elections could be held. These elections, in December 1962, were won by Juan Bosch, a scholar and poet who had founded the opposition \"Partido Revolucionario Dominicano\" (Dominican Revolutionary Party, or PRD) in exile, during the Trujillo years. His leftist policies, including land redistribution, nationalization of certain foreign holdings, and attempts to bring the military under civilian control, antagonized the military officer corps, the Catholic hierarchy, and the upper-class, who feared \"another Cuba\".\nIn September 1963, Bosch was overthrown by a right-wing military coup led by Colonel El\u00edas Wessin and was replaced by a three-man military junta. Bosch went into exile to Puerto Rico. Afterwards, a supposedly civilian triumvirate established a de facto dictatorship.\nDominican Civil War and second United States occupation 1965\u201366.\nOn April 16, 1965, growing dissatisfaction generated another military rebellion on April 24, 1965, that demanded Bosch's restoration. The insurgents, reformist officers and civilian combatants loyal to Bosch commanded by Colonel Francisco Caama\u00f1o, and who called themselves the Constitutionalists, staged a coup, seizing the national palace. Immediately, conservative military forces, led by Wessin and calling themselves Loyalists, struck back, strafing the rebel-held national palace with four World War II\u2013vintage P-51 Mustangs, losing one to ground machine-gun fire.\nOn April 27, Colonel Caama\u00f1o ordered his troops to cross the Duarte Bridge, where they defeated General Wessin's tanks attempting to cross from San Isidro. Meanwhile, rebels took control of downtown Santo Domingo, seizing the Ozama Fortress and an arms cache. In the western residential areas, rebel paramilitary groups harassed U.S. citizens at a hotel, lining them up outside and firing shots over their heads.\nOn April 28, the anti-Bosch army elements requested U.S. military intervention and U.S. forces landed, ostensibly to protect U.S. citizens and to evacuate U.S. and other foreign nationals. The first U.S. casualty occurred when a Dominican sniper killed a Marine near the U.S. embassy. U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson, convinced of the defeat of the Loyalist forces and fearing the creation of \"a second Cuba\" on America's doorstep, ordered U.S. forces to restore order. In what was initially known as Operation Power Pack, 27,677 U.S. troops were ultimately ordered to the Dominican Republic.\nDenied a military victory, the Constitutionalist rebels quickly had a Constitutionalist congress elect Caama\u00f1o president of the country. U.S. officials countered by backing General Antonio Imbert. On May 7, Imbert was sworn in as president of the Government of National Reconstruction. The next step in the stabilization process, as envisioned by Washington and the OAS, was to arrange an agreement between President Caama\u00f1o and President Imbert to form a provisional government committed to early elections. However, Caama\u00f1o refused to meet with Imbert until several of the Loyalist officers, including Wessin y Wessin, were made to leave the country.\nThe American forces attempted to jam Radio Santo Domingo, which the Constitutionalist rebels were using to broadcast messages inciting nationwide rebellion. Despite jamming operations and attacks on relay sites, the rebel broadcasts persisted. On May 13, Imbert launched an eight-day offensive to eliminate rebel resistance in the northern sector. He also directed the Dominican Air Force to target Radio Santo Domingo and its primary transmitter sites near the Peynado Bridge, north of the city. On May 14, Dominican special forces attacked and destroyed the alternate studio and transmitter site north of the Duarte Bridge. These collective actions managed to weaken Radio Santo Domingo to the point that it could no longer broadcast beyond the capital. Alongside this, the Americans realized the significant challenge of effectively conducting jamming operations against a robust commercial broadcasting complex, especially using military jammers designed for military frequencies.\nImbert's forces captured Radio Santo Domingo along with the northern part of the capital, destroying buildings and killing civilians. A cease-fire was negotiated by May 21, marking the beginning of neutrality for U.S. forces. At this time, 18 Americans had been killed in action and 117 wounded.\nBy May 14, the Americans had established a \"safety corridor\" connecting the San Isidro Air Base and the \"Duarte\" Bridge to the Embajador Hotel and United States Embassy in the center of Santo Domingo, essentially sealing off the Constitutionalist area of Santo Domingo. Roadblocks were established and patrols ran continuously. Some 6,500 people from many nations were evacuated to safety. In addition, the US forces airlifted in relief supplies for Dominican nationals.\nBy mid-May, a majority of the OAS voted for Operation \"Push Ahead\", the reduction of United States forces and their replacement by an Inter-American Peace Force (IAPF). The Inter-American Peace Force was formally established on May 23. The following troops were sent by each country: Brazil \u2013 1,130, Honduras \u2013 250, Paraguay \u2013 184, Nicaragua \u2013 160, Costa Rica \u2013 21 military police, and El Salvador \u2013 3 staff officers. The first contingent to arrive was a rifle company from Honduras which was soon backed by detachments from Costa Rica, El Salvador, and Nicaragua. Brazil provided the largest unit, a reinforced infantry battalion. Brazilian General Hugo Panasco Alvim assumed command of the OAS ground forces, and on May 26 the U.S. forces began to withdraw.\nOn June 15, the Constitutionalists\u2014supported by heavy machine guns, mortars, and a few light 37mm gun tanks\u2014attacked American positions. The ensuing two days of fighting in Ciudad Nueva resulted in 5 U.S. soldiers killed and 36 wounded. The Brazilians, who had orders to remain on the defensive, suffered five wounded. The Constitutionalists lost 67 killed and 165 wounded. A truce was declared on August 31, 1965. However, a U.S. paratrooper in the corridor was killed by a rifle grenade fired from the rebel zone on the night of September 2. Most American troops left shortly afterwards as policing and peacekeeping operations were turned over to Brazilian troops, but some U.S. military presence remained until September 1966. On September 14, two members of a support unit attached to the 82nd were ambushed by civilians riding motorcycles. Both were shot in the back. One G.I. died instantly; the other died at a hospital.\nAmerican and OAS peacekeeping forces departed by September 21, 1966. A total of 48 American soldiers and marines died, 27 in action (nine marines and 18 soldiers); 189 were wounded in action, as were six Brazilians and five Paraguayans. Between 2,850 and 4,275 Dominicans, mostly civilians, were killed, and 3,000 were wounded during the civil war.\nFourth Republic 1966\u2013present.\nBalaguer's second Presidency 1966\u20131978.\nIn June 1966, Joaqu\u00edn Balaguer, leader of the Reformist Party (which later became the Social Christian Reformist Party (PRSC)), was elected and then re-elected to office in May 1970 and May 1974, both times after the major opposition parties withdrew late in the campaign because of the high degree of violence by pro-government groups. On November 28, 1966, a constitution was created, signed, and put into effect. The constitution stated that the president was elected to a four-year term. If there was a close election there would be a second round of voting to decide the winner. The voting age was eighteen, but married people under eighteen could also vote.\nOn one hand, Balaguer was considered to be a \"caudillo\" who led a regime of terror where 11,000 victims were either tortured or forcibly disappeared and killed. However, Balaguer was also considered to be a major reformer who was instrumental in the liberalization of the Dominican government. During his time as President of the Dominican Republic, the country saw major changes such as legalized political activities, surprise army promotions and demotions, promoting health and education improvements and the instituting of modest land reforms.\nBalaguer led the Dominican Republic through a thorough economic restructuring, based on opening the country to foreign investment while protecting state-owned industries and certain private interests. This distorted, dependent development model produced uneven results. For most of Balaguer's first nine years in office the country experienced high growth rates (e.g., an average GDP growth rate of 9.4% between 1970 and 1975), to the extent that people talked about the \"Dominican miracle\". Foreign, mostly U.S. investment, as well as foreign aid, flowed into the country. Sugar, then the country's main export product, enjoyed good prices in the international market, and tourism grew tremendously. As part of Balaguer's land reform policies, land was dished out to peasants among the country's rural population.\nHowever, this excellent macroeconomic performance was not accompanied by an equitable distribution of wealth in some other areas of the country. While a group of new millionaires flourished during Balaguer's administrations, some of the poor simply became poorer. Moreover, some of the poor were commonly the target of state repression, and their socioeconomic claims were labeled 'communist' and dealt with accordingly by the state security apparatus. In the May 1978 election, Balaguer was defeated in his bid for a fourth successive term by Antonio Guzm\u00e1n Fern\u00e1ndez of the PRD. Balaguer then ordered troops to storm the election centre and destroy ballot boxes, declaring himself the victor. U.S. President Jimmy Carter refused to recognize Balaguer's claim, and, faced with the loss of foreign aid, Balaguer stepped down.\nGuzm\u00e1n / Blanco interregnum 1978\u20131986.\nGuzm\u00e1n's inauguration on August 16 marked the country's first peaceful transfer of power from one freely elected president to another.\nHurricane David hit the Dominican Republic in August 1979, which caused over $1 billion in damage.\nBy the late 1970s, economic expansion slowed considerably as sugar prices declined and oil prices rose. Rising inflation and unemployment diminished support for the government and helped trigger a wave of mass emigration from the Dominican Republic to New York, coming on the heels of the similar migration of Puerto Ricans in the preceding decades.\nGuzm\u00e1n committed suicide on July 5, 1982, a month before he would have left office. He was confronted with evidence of his daughter Sonia Guzm\u00e1n's husband's corruption using her father's position for monetary gain. Guzm\u00e1n was known as a serious man who never stole money. After being confronted with this, he entered his bathroom and shot himself.\nElections were again held in 1982. Salvador Jorge Blanco of the Dominican Revolutionary Party defeated Bosch and a resurgent Balaguer.\nBalaguer's third Presidency 1986\u20131996.\nBalaguer completed his return to power in 1986 when he won the Presidency again and remained in office for the next ten years. Elections in 1990 were marked by violence and suspected electoral fraud. The 1994 election too saw widespread pre-election violence, often aimed at intimidating members of the opposition. Balaguer won in 1994 but most observers felt the election had been stolen. Under pressure from the United States, Balaguer agreed to hold new elections in 1996. He himself would not run.\nFern\u00e1ndez: First administration 1996\u20132000.\nIn 1996, U.S.-raised Leonel Fern\u00e1ndez Reyna of Bosch's \"Partido de la Liberaci\u00f3n Dominicana\" (Dominican Liberation Party) secured more than 51% of the vote, through an alliance with Balaguer. The first item on the president's agenda was the partial sale of some state-owned enterprises. Fern\u00e1ndez was praised for ending decades of isolationism and improving ties with other Caribbean countries, but he was criticized for not fighting corruption or alleviating the poverty that affected 60% of the population.\nMej\u00eda's administration 2000\u20132004.\nIn May 2000 the center-left Hip\u00f3lito Mej\u00eda of the PRD was elected president amid popular discontent over power outages in the recently privatized electric industry. His presidency saw major inflation and instability of the peso in 2003 because of the bankruptcy of three major commercial banks in the country due to the bad policies of the principal managers. During his remaining time as president, he took action to save most savers of the closed banks, avoiding a major crisis. The relatively stable currency fell from about 16 Dominican pesos to 1 United States dollar to about 60 DOP to US$1 and was in the 40s to the dollar when he left office in August 2004. In the May 2004 presidential elections, he was defeated by former president Leonel Fern\u00e1ndez.\nFern\u00e1ndez: Second administration 2004\u20132012.\nFern\u00e1ndez instituted austerity measures to deflate the peso and rescue the country from its economic crisis, and in the first half of 2006, the economy grew 11.7%. The peso is currently (2019) at the exchange rate of c. 52 DOP to US$1.\nOver the last three decades, remittances (\"remesas\") from Dominicans living abroad, mainly in the United States, have become increasingly important to the economy. From 1990 to 2000, the Dominican population of the U.S. doubled in size, from 520,121 in 1990 to 1,041,910, two-thirds of whom were born in the Dominican Republic itself. More than half of all Dominican Americans live in New York City, with the largest concentration in the neighborhood of Washington Heights in northern Manhattan. Over the past decade, the Dominican Republic has become the largest source of immigration to New York City, and today the metropolitan area of New York has a larger Dominican population than any city except Santo Domingo. Dominican communities have also developed in New Jersey (particularly Paterson), Miami, Boston, Philadelphia, Providence, Rhode Island, and Lawrence, Massachusetts. In addition, tens of thousands of Dominicans and their descendants live in Puerto Rico. Many Dominicans arrive in Puerto Rico illegally by sea across the Mona Passage, some staying and some moving on to the mainland U.S. (See Dominican immigration to Puerto Rico.) Dominicans living abroad sent an estimated $3 billion in remittances to relatives at home, in 2006. In 1997, a new law took effect, allowing Dominicans living abroad to retain their citizenship and vote in presidential elections. President Fern\u00e1ndez, who grew up in New York, was the principal beneficiary of this law.\nThe Dominican Republic was involved in the US-led coalition in Iraq, as part of the Spain-led Latin-American Plus Ultra Brigade. But in 2004, the nation pulled its 300 or so troops out of Iraq.\nDanilo Medina's administration 2012\u20132020.\nDanilo Medina began his tenure with a series of controversial tax reforms so as to deal with the government's troublesome fiscal situation encountered by the new administration. In 2012, he had won presidency as the candidate of ruling Dominican Liberation Party (PLD).\nIn 2016, President Medina won re-election, defeating the main opposition candidate businessman Luis Abinader, with a wide margin.\nLuis Abinader 2020\u2013present.\nIn 2020 Luis Abinader, the presidential candidate for the opposition Modern Revolutionary Party (PRM) won the election and he became the new president, ending the 16-year rule of PLD since 2004. In May 2024, President Luis Abinader won a second term in elections. Especially his tough attitude towards migration from neighbouring Haiti was popular among voters."}
{"id": "8064", "revid": "40943757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8064", "title": "Geography of the Dominican Republic", "text": "The Dominican Republic (Spanish: \"Rep\u00fablica Dominicana\") is a country in the West Indies that occupies the eastern five-eighths of Hispaniola. It has an area of 48,670\u00a0km2, including offshore islands. The land border shared with Haiti, which occupies the western three-eighths of the island, is 376\u00a0km long. The maximum length, east to west, is 390\u00a0km from Punta de Agua to Las Lajas, on the border with Haiti. The maximum width, north to south, is 265\u00a0km from Cape Isabela to Cape Beata. The capital, Santo Domingo, is located on the south coast.\nThe Dominican Republic's shores are washed by the Atlantic Ocean to the north and the Caribbean Sea to the south. The Mona Passage, a channel about 130\u00a0km wide, separates the country (and Hispaniola) from Puerto Rico.\nPhysical features.\nThe Dominican Republic is a country with many mountains, and the highest peaks of the West Indies are found here. The chains of mountains show a direction northwest\u2013southeast, except in the Southern peninsula (in Haiti) where they have a direction west\u2013east. The mountains are separated by valleys with the same general direction.\nFrom north to south, the mountain ranges and valleys are:\nClimate.\nThe Dominican Republic is a tropical, maritime nation. Owing to its diverse mountainous topography, the country's climate shows considerable variation for its size, and has the most diverse climate zones of all the Caribbean islands, including subtropical highland climates (\"Cwb\"), oceanic climates (\"Cfb\") and hot semi-arid climates (\"BSh\") along the usual tropical savanna (\"Aw\"), monsoon (\"Am\"), and rainforest (\"Af\") climates typical of a Caribbean nation. Conditions are ameliorated in many areas by elevation and by the northeast trade winds, which blow steadily from the Atlantic all year long. The annual mean temperature is ; regional mean temperatures range from in the heart of the Cordillera Central (Constanza) to as high as in arid regions. Temperatures rarely rise above , and freezing temperatures only occur in winter in the highest mountains. The average temperature in Santo Domingo in January is , and in July.\nThe rain season for the northern coast is from November to January. For the rest of the country, the rain season is from May to November. The average annual rainfall is , with extremes of or more in the mountainous northeast (the windward side of the island) and in the southwestern valleys. The western valleys, along the Haitian border, remain relatively dry, with less than of annual precipitation, due to the rain shadow effect caused by the central and northern mountain ranges. The northwestern and southeastern extremes of the country are also arid.\nThe Dominican Republic is occasionally damaged by tropical storms and hurricanes, which originate in the mid-Atlantic and southeastern Caribbean from June until November (mainly from August to October) each year.\nIslands.\nThere are several smaller islands and cays that are part of Dominican territory. The largest islands are:\nRivers and lakes.\nThe 8 longest rivers of the Dominican Republic are:\nThe Artibonite River is the longest river of the island, but only 68\u00a0km flows through the Dominican Republic.\nThe largest lake of Hispaniola, and of the Caribbean, is Lake Enriquillo. It is located in the \"Hoya de Enriquillo\" with an area of 265\u00a0km2. There are three small islands within the lake. It is around 40 meters below sea level, and is a hypersaline lake, with a higher concentration of salt than seawater.\nOther lakes are \"Rinc\u00f3n\" (fresh water, area of 28.2\u00a0km2), \"Oviedo\" (brackish water, area of 28\u00a0km2), \"Redonda\", and \"Lim\u00f3n\"."}
{"id": "8065", "revid": "47905414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8065", "title": "Demographics of the Dominican Republic", "text": "This is a demography of the population of the Dominican Republic including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nPopulation size and structure.\nThe area was first included in world trade in 1492 when Christopher Columbus docked on the island of Hispaniola.\nWhen Spain occupied the country in 1496, the population consisted of Arawak (Ta\u00edno Indians). When Spain returned in 1496, they founded the current capital, Santo Domingo, as the first European city in America. The country came under Spanish rule. France took over the part of Hispaniola that is today Haiti. During the colony era, The Dominican Republic acted as a sugar supplier to Spain and France. Many whites moved to the country during this period.\nIn 1496, Santo Domingo was built and became the new capital, and remains the oldest continuously inhabited European city in the Americas.\nToday, two other large groups have joined, while the indigenous population has mostly disappeared. 45% of Dominicans consider themselves to have some significant Indigenous/Endemic ancestry, 18% are white, 7.8% are fully or predominantly black and 74% are mixed (Mestizo/Mulatto/\"Indio\"/Trigue\u00f1o).\nAbout 9.2% of the Dominican population claims a European immigrant background, according to the 2021 Fondo de Poblaci\u00f3n de las Naciones Unidas survey. During the many years that have passed since the great immigration, the races have been mixed and it can be difficult to distinguish. In terms of race, they are all similar to the other Caribbean islands. The Spaniards brought Christianity to the Dominican Republic, and today about 50% of the population reports as being Catholic. One clear remnant of the Spanish colonial era on the population is the official and widespread use of the Spanish language.\nAccording to the total population was in , compared to 2,380,000 in 1950. The proportion of the population aged below 15 in 2010 was 31.2%, 62.8% were aged between 15 and 65 years of age, while 6% were aged 65 years or older.\nVital statistics.\nUN estimates.\nRegistration of vital events is not universal in the Dominican Republic. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates:\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\nEthnic groups.\nDominicans of full or predominant European descent: 17.8%, Mixed (Mestizo, Mulatto, \"Indio\", Triracial) descent: 74.4%, Afro descent: 7.8%\nReligion.\nRoman Catholic 51.3%, Evangelical 13%, Protestant 7.9%, Adventist 1.4%, other 1.8%, atheist 0.2%, none 22.4%, unspecified 2% (2018 est.)"}
{"id": "8067", "revid": "36255219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8067", "title": "Economy of the Dominican Republic", "text": "The economy of the Dominican Republic is the seventh largest\nin Latin America, and is the largest in the Caribbean and Central American region. The Dominican Republic is an upper-middle income developing country with important sectors including mining, tourism, manufacturing (medical devices, electrical equipment, pharmaceuticals, and chemicals), energy, real estate, infrastructure, telecommunications and agriculture. The Dominican Republic is on track to achieve its goal of becoming a high-income country by 2030, and is expected to grow 79% in this decade. The country is the site of the single largest gold mine in Latin America, the Pueblo Viejo mine. Although the service sector is currently the leading employer of Dominicans (due principally to growth in tourism and free-trade zones), agriculture remains an important sector in terms of the domestic market and is in second place (behind mining) in terms of export earnings. Tourism accounts for more than $7.4 billion in annual earnings in 2019. Free-trade zone earnings and tourism are the fastest-growing export sectors. A leading growth engine in the Free-trade zone sector is the production of medical equipment for export having a value-added per employee of , total revenue of billion, and a growth rate of 7.7% in 2019. The medical instrument export sector represents one of the highest-value added sectors of the country's economy, a true growth engine for the country's emerging market. Remittances are an important sector of the economy, contributing billion in 2020. Most of these funds are used to cover household expenses, such as housing, food, clothing, health care and education. Secondarily, remittances have financed businesses and productive activities. Thirdly, this combined effect has induced investment by the private sector and helps fund the public sector through its value-added tax. The combined import market including the free-trade-zones amounts to a market of $20 billion a year in 2019. The combined export sector had revenues totaling $11 billion in 2019. The consumer market is equivalent to $61 billion in 2019. An important indicator is the average commercial loan interest rate, which directs short-term investment and stimulates long-term investment in the economy. It is currently 8.30%, as of June 2021.\nThe Dominican Republic's most important trading partner is the United States (over 40% of total commercial exchange; over $12 billion in trade). Other major trade partners are China (over $3 billion in trade), Switzerland (over $1 billion), Puerto Rico (over $800 million), Mexico (over $700 million), Haiti (over $700 million), Spain (over $700 million), the Netherlands (over $700 million), Canada (over $600 million), Brazil (over $500 million), and Germany (over $500 million), in that quantitative order. The country exports free-trade-zone manufactured products (medical devices, electrical equipment, pharmaceuticals, and chemicals), gold, nickel, agricultural products, liquor, cocoa beans, silver, and sauces and seasonings. It imports petroleum, industrial raw materials, capital goods, and foodstuffs. On 5 September 2005, the Congress of the Dominican Republic ratified a free trade agreement with the U.S. and five Central American countries, the Dominican Republic \u2013 Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR). CAFTA-DR entered into force for the Dominican Republic on 1 March 2007. The total stock of U.S. foreign direct investment (FDI) in Dominican Republic as of 2019 was U.S. $42 billion, much of it directed to the energy, tourism, real estate, manufacturing, infrastructure and the telecommunications sectors. In 2019 the foreign direct investment stock amounted to $42 billion a significant growth in the last decade and a half. In 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, foreign direct investment flows in the Dominican Republic had remained strong at $2.5 billion added to the stock in that year. Having grown to an estimated $44.5 billion, and growing more than ten-fold since 2006 when the liberalization efforts began.\nAn important aspect of the Dominican economy is the Free Trade Zone industry (FTZ), which made up U.S. $6.2 billion in Dominican exports for 2019. Reports show, however, that the FTZs lost approximately 60,000 between 2005 and 2007 and suffered a 4% decrease in total exports in 2006. The textiles sector experienced an approximate 17% drop in exports in 2006 due in part to the appreciation of the Dominican peso against the dollar, Asian competition following expiration of the quotas of the Multi-Fiber Arrangement, and a government-mandated increase in salaries, which should have occurred in 2005 but was postponed to January 2006. Lost Dominican business was captured by firms in Central America and Asia. The tobacco, jewelry, medical, and pharmaceutical sectors in the FTZs all reported increases for 2006, which offset textile and garment losses. Industry experts from the FTZs expected that entry into force of the CAFTA-DR agreement would promote substantial growth in the FTZ sector in 2007. By the end of the last decade-and-a-half the free-trade-zone sector has rebounded and surpassed the former amounts of $4.5 billion in 2006 to grow to $6.2 billion by 2019.\nPrimary Industries.\nAgriculture.\nIn 2018, the Dominican Republic produced 644 thousand tons of avocado (it is the 2nd largest producer in the world), 1 million tons of papaya (it is the 4th largest producer in the world), 5.2 million tons of sugarcane, 2.1 million tons of banana, 85 thousand tons of cocoa, 442 thousand tons of palm oil, 407 thousand tons of pineapple, 403 thousand tons of coconut, 627 thousand tons of rice, 160 thousand tons of cassava, 136 thousand tons of orange, in addition to from smaller productions of other agricultural products such as potato, lemon, melon, onion and yam.\nWith almost 80% of the total land area suitable for crop production and about 17% of the labor force engaged in farming, agriculture remains the primary occupation, accounting for 11% of GDP in 2001. Value of agricultural output grew at an average annual rate of 7.1% during 1968\u201373, but since 1975 the sector has been hampered by droughts (1975, 1977, and 1979), hurricanes (in 1979 and 1980), and slumping world prices and quota allocations for sugar (since 1985). In 1999, agricultural production was 0.4% higher than during 1989\u201391. The fertile Cibao Valley is the main agricultural center. In 1998, arable land totaled ; with land under permanent crops at .\nAfter Cuba, the Dominican Republic is the second-largest Caribbean producer of sugarcane, the nation's most important crop. The State Sugar Council operates 12 sugar mills and accounts for about half of total production. Other large producers are the privately owned Vicini, with three mills, and Central Romana Corporation, whose mill is the largest in the country. Sugar is grown in the southeastern plains, around Barahona &amp; on the North Coast Plain. In 1999, sugar production was 4.4\u00a0million tons, down from an average of 7.1\u00a0million tons during 1989\u20131991. Output of sugar has declined annually since 1982, and land is gradually being taken out of sugar production and switched to food crops. Production of raw sugar rose from 636,000 tons in 1990 to 813,000 tons in 1997 but fell to 374,000 tons in 1999.\nPart of the crop was destroyed by hurricanes in 1979 and 1980, and 1979\u201380 production was only 670,000 bags (40,200 tons). Although production was usually about 57,000\u201359,000 tons annually in the 1980s, the acreage harvested declined from in the early 1980s to in 1999, indicating a greater yield per acre. Coffee production in 1999 was estimated at 35,000 tons; exports of coffee in 2001 generated $11\u00a0million. Cocoa and tobacco are also grown for export. Dominican Republic is one of the top 10 major producer and exporter of cocoa in the world. Cocoa is also grown in the Cibao Valley around San Francisco de Macoris. Tobacco is also grown in the Cibao Valley, but around Santiago. In 1999, production of cocoa beans was 26,000 tons and of tobacco, 35,000 tons. Rice is grown around Monte Cristi &amp; San Francisco de Macoris. Banana production in 1999 was 432,000 tons. Production of other crops in 1999 (in thousands of tons) included rice, 563; coconuts, 184; cassava, 127; tomatoes, 281; pulses, 69; dry beans, 26; eggplants, 7; and peanuts, 2.\nLivestock farming.\nIn 2001, Dominican livestock included 187,000 goats and 106,000 sheep. There were also about 2.1 million head of cattle, 60% for beef and 40% for dairy. The hog population was decimated by African swine fever in 1978, decreasing from 400,000 in 1978 to 20,000 in 1979; by 2001, however, it was 565,000. Poultry is the main meat source because it is cheaper than beef or pork. Poultry production relies on imports of feed grain from the United States. In 2001, 203,000 tons of poultry meat were produced, along with 71,000 tons of beef and 420,000 tons of milk.\nFishing.\nIn 2017 the total marine production was 18,000 metric tons. Marlin, barracuda, kingfish, mackerel, tuna, sailfish, and tarpon are found in the Monte Cristi Bank and Saman\u00e1 Bay, which also supports bonito, snapper, and American grouper.\nForestry.\nAbout 28.4% of the total land area consisted of forests and woodlands in 2000. Round wood production in 2000 totaled 562,000 cu m (19.8 million cu ft). Timber is cut for land clearing for the use of agriculture. There are important national parks protecting the natural resources and aquifers of the country.\nMining.\nIn 2019, the country was the 9th largest world producer of nickel. The country had almost zero production of gold until 2011, where it grew exponentially. In 2016 the country produced almost 38 tons. The country had almost zero production of silver until 2008, where it grew exponentially. In 2017 the country produced 147 tons.\nFerronickel was the country's leading export commodity and third-leading industry. Nickel is mined at Bonao. In 2000, nickel production was 39,943 tons, ranking tenth in the world, a decrease from 49,152 in 1997. Currently the most important mineral export is gold.\nProduction of gold in the Pueblo Viejo mine is the largest gold producing mine in Latin America, and fourth most productive mine in the world producing a total of 30,100\u00a0kg of gold in 2018. The extraction by a foreign company of gold at one of the largest mines in the Western Hemisphere has startled and concerned a part of the country who believe that the natural resource should be extracted by local companies and not foreign. Some groups began to protest against Barrick Gold in 2009 and 2010. In 2019 gold is one of the largest exports of the country totaling $1.6 billion and has helped to balance the commodity current account balance.\nProduction of bauxite, traditionally the principal mining product, ceased in 1992. The Aluminum Co. of America (Alcoa) mined bauxite between 1959 and 1983, when it turned its concession over to the state. Production in 1991 dropped 92% from the previous year, as a presidential decree suspended mining operations at the largest mine, in response to increasing fears of deforestation, although reforestation of mined areas was in progress. Output averaged 1 million tons each year.\nThe country was one of the few sources of amber in the Western Hemisphere. Salt Mountain, a 16\u00a0km block of almost solid salt west of Barahona, was the world's largest known salt deposit. There were also large deposits of gypsum near Salt Mountain, making the Dominican Republic one of three sources of gypsum in the Caribbean. The country also produced hydraulic cement, limestone, marble, and sand and gravel. Substantial lignite deposits were found in the early 1980s. Deposits of copper and platinum are also found in the country.\nIndustry.\nThe industrial sector contributed an estimated 31.1% to the country's GDP in 2023, led by mining and the manufacture of goods for export to the United States, Europe and Asia. To a lesser extent, there is the manufacture of food products, consumer non-durables, and building materials for the local market. The sector employed 20.8% of the workforce in 2014.\nAbout 500 companies in the Dominican Republic manufacture goods primarily for the North American market. Situated in 50 industrial free zones around the country, these mostly foreign-owned corporations take advantage of generous tax and other financial inducements offered by the government to businesses that operate within the zones. Approximately 200,000 people, or about 8% of the workforce, are employed in this sector. They mostly produce clothing, electronic components, footwear, and leather goods, which are assembled. The raw materials or semi-manufactured goods are usually imported duty-free from other emerging markets (electronic parts are imported from industrialized Puerto Rico) and assembled in the free trade zones. Products include cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, textiles, perfumes &amp; foodstuffs. The value of free-trade-zone exports amounted to billion in 2019, while their imports of intermediate products amounted to billion.\nOther, more traditional manufacturing is based on sugar refining, cement, iron and steel production, and food processing. Rum is a significant export commodity, and beer and cigarettes are manufactured for local consumption. Most industry of this sort is located around the working-class perimeter of Santo Domingo and other large towns. Metaldom is the main steel manufacturer in the country, with production of 1 million tons per year, most of which is exported.\nServices.\nServices were estimated to contribute 56% of the GDP in 2023 and employs 64.7% of the population.\nTourism.\nSince the mid-1980s the tourism sector has become one of the country's most important sources of foreign exchange, and more popular tourist destinations. The country is famous for its favorable location in the Caribbean, tropical climate, beaches, and the restored Spanish colonial architecture. Many foreign investors have and continue to be encouraged to invest here to build and expand resorts and airports around the coasts. During this same period, tourism displaced sugar as the main source of the country's earnings, and by 1997 it was generating more than half of the country's total foreign exchange. In 2019 it generated one-third of the total foreign exchange for the country.\nTourism is the single biggest revenue earner, growing from humble beginnings in 1980 to more than $7.4 billion by 2019. Successive governments have invested heavily in tourism development, creating upgraded airports and other infrastructure. The number of tourist amounted to 6.4 million tourists arriving in the country in 2019. Most come from Europe, with about 25% originating from the United States or Canada. The country now has almost 70,000 hotel rooms, more than any other Caribbean country. About 50,000 Dominicans are directly employed in this sector, mostly working in hotels, and another 110,000 are indirectly employed as taxi drivers, tour guides, or tourist-shop staff. Most tourists visit the Dominican Republic on account of its beaches, but there is an expanding eco-tourism and outdoor activity sector, focused on the country's mountains and wildlife.\nAlthough tourism generates large revenues, some scholars and activists argue that the development of tourism also has high impacts on many socioeconomic aspects. For instance, they argue that it involves ecological deterioration, profit leakage, social displacement, disported cultural patterns, rising land values, drugs and prostitution.\nRetail.\nRetail activity in the Dominican Republic takes many forms, from U.S.-style supermarkets and shopping malls in Santo Domingo to rural markets and tiny family-run corner stores in villages. A small but affluent middle class can afford to shop at the former, while the lower-income rural community resorts to buying small amounts of daily essentials from general stores (these small stores often double as pubs). In an attempt to regulate the retail sector, the government has recently reformed taxation laws, so that small shops pay taxes on a regular monthly basis. Many transactions, however, go unrecorded.\nEnergy.\nThe electricity sector has had big investments in the last decade 2010 to 2020 diversifying the sector away from petroleum which decreased from 50% of energy generation to 7%. The largest generation sources as of 2021 are coal, natural gas and renewables representing together 93% of electricity generation. This has transformed a strategic sector of the economy into a stable and lower cost sector. The rate of electricity loss improved from 38% in 2005 to 30% in 2019 showing improvement in the infrastructure. Low collection rates, illegal connections, infrastructure problems and poor governance are the sources of the high level of electricity loss in the system. The government plans to continue providing subsidies. Congress passed a law in 2007 that criminalizes the act of illegal electric connections. The state subsidizes the cost of electricity, funding the cost via indirect taxation instead of direct price increases for lower-income households, therefore it is a redistributive policy and partly funded by the country as a whole instead of the direct consumers of electricity. The profit from renewables, natural gas, and coal is positive and considered the current and future of the system, given that petroleum derivatives are considered more volatile and expensive in running costs.\nAs of 2020 significant investments in the electricity sector have been realized with the construction of the Punta Catalina coal-fired plant. Significantly diversifying the electric sector's away from the traditional mix to one with lower cost. The growth of the renewables sector and the natural gas power sector has made significant strides in this respect in the last few years, and is expected to continue to grow with foreign and local investment in the sector.\nEmployment.\nLabor participation has improved over the last decade from 62.4% to 67.3%. Despite this growth, female labor participation rates lag more than 25 percentage points behind male labor participation rates, 52.7% and 77.9% respectively. This disparity highlights ongoing challenges in achieving gender equality in the workforce and indicates potential barriers that women face in accessing employment opportunities. Marginal real wage growth since the end of the 1990s suggests low quality jobs and low bargaining power of employees, which can further exacerbate economic inequality.\nInformal Employment.\nIn 2021, 45.5% of Dominicans lived in households where all workers were employed through informal jobs. This situation reflects a significant portion of the economy that operates outside formal regulations, leading to a lack of job security and access to social safety net resources. In rural areas informal employment was 69.1%, compared to 56.9% in urban areas, underscoring regional disparities in formal employment opportunities.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132024 (with IMF staff estimates in 2025\u20132029). Inflation below 5% is in green.\nOther statistics.\nGDP:\npurchasing power parity \u2013 $293.365 billion (2024 est.)\nGDP \u2013 real growth rate:\n5.4% (2024 est.)\nGDP \u2013 per capita:\npurchasing power parity \u2013 $27,120 (2024 est.)\nGDP \u2013 composition by sector:\n\"agriculture:\"\n5.5%\n\"industry:\"\n33.8%\n\"services:\"\n60.8% (2017 est.)\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\n4.2% (2024 est.)\nLabor force:\n5.278 million (2022 est.)\nLabor force \u2013 by occupation:\n\"agriculture:\"\n14.4%\n\"industry:\"\n20.8%\n\"services:\"\n64.7% (2014 est.)\nUnemployment rate:\n6.0% (2024 est.)\nPopulation below poverty line:\n23.9% (2021 est.)\nBudget:\n\"revenues:\"\n$14.10 billion\n\"expenditures:\"\n$16.60 billion (2021 est.)\nIndustries:\ntourism, sugar processing, ferronickel and gold mining, textiles, cement, tobacco, electrical components, medical devices\nElectricity \u2013 production:\n15.53 billion kWh (2015)\nElectricity \u2013 consumption:\n13.25 billion kWh (2015)\nElectricity \u2013 exports:\n0 kWh (2005)\nElectricity \u2013 imports:\n0 kWh (2005)\nOil \u2013 production: (2014)\nOil \u2013 consumption: (2012 est.)\nOil \u2013 exports: (2017)\nOil \u2013 imports: (2017)\nOil \u2013 proved reserves: (1 January 2006 est.)\nNatural gas \u2013 production: 0 cu m (2005 est.)\nNatural gas \u2013 consumption: 1.108 million cu m (2015 est).\nNatural gas \u2013 exports: 0 cu m (2005 est.)\nNatural gas \u2013 imports: 1.108 million cu m (2015)\nNatural gas \u2013 proved reserves: 0 cu m (1 January 2006 est.)\nAgriculture \u2013 products:\nsugarcane, coffee, cotton, cocoa, tobacco, rice, beans, potatoes, corn, bananas; cattle, pigs, dairy products, beef, eggs\nExports:\n$10.33 billion f.o.b. (2017 est.)\nExports \u2013 commodities:\nferro nickel, sugar, gold, silver, coffee, cocoa, tobacco, meats, consumer goods\nExports \u2013 partners:\nUnited States 50.4%, United Kingdom 3.2%, Belgium 2.4% (2017)\nImports:\n$19 billion f.o.b. (2017 est.)\nImports \u2013 commodities:\nfoodstuffs, petroleum, cotton and fabrics, chemicals and pharmaceuticals\nImports \u2013 partners:\nUnited States 41.4%, China 13.9%, Mexico 4.5%, Brazil 4.3% (2017)\nDebt \u2013 external:\n$29.69 billion (31 December 2017 est.)\nEconomic aid \u2013 recipient:\n$76.99 million (2005)\nCurrency:\nDominican peso (DOP)\nExchange rates:\nDominican pesos per US dollar \u2013 33.113 (2007), 33.406 (2006), 30.409 (2005), 42.12 (2004), 30.831 (2003)\nFiscal year:\ncalendar year"}
{"id": "8068", "revid": "1265419390", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8068", "title": "Telecommunications in the Dominican Republic", "text": " \nTelecommunications in the Dominican Republic include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nNumerous television channels are available. Tricom, S.A, WIND Telecom, S.A., Viva (network operator), and Claro Codetel provide television services digitally, with channels from Latin America and elsewhere in the world. There are extensive mobile phone and land-line services. Internet access is available as Cable Internet, ADSL, WiMAX, EDGE, EV-DO and UMTS/HSDPA in most parts of the country. Projects to extend Wi-Fi (wireless internet) hot spots have been undertaken in Santo Domingo. Since 2015 the country has been actively extending its fiber optics network, to provide faster and more reliable internet to business and private users.\nThe Instituto Dominicano De Telecomunicaciones (INDOTEL) regulates and supervises the development of the country's telecommunications market.\nRadio and television.\nCable television in the Dominican Republic is provided by a variety of companies. These companies offer both English and Spanish language television, plus a range of channels in other languages, high definition channels, pay-per-view movies and events, sports packages, premium movies channels and adult channels such as HBO, Playboy TV, Cinecanal, MLB Extra Innings, etc. The channels are not only from the Dominican Republic, but also the United States and Europe.\nIn the Dominican Republic there are 46 in VHF and UHF channels free-to-air channels. The programming on the free of charge channels consists mainly of locally produced entertainment shows, news, and comedy shows; and foreign sitcoms, soap operas, movies, cartoons, and sports programs.\nThe main service provider in the Dominican Republic is Tricom. Aster is concentrated in Santo Domingo, but is expanding its service throughout the Dominican Republic. There are new companies using new technologies that are expanding quickly such as Claro TV (IPTV and Satellite TV), Wind Telecom (MMDS) and SKY (Satellite TV).\nOn election day in May 2012 government broadcast regulators took two popular national television channels (11 and 33) off the air on the grounds that they violated an electoral law prohibiting distribution of exit poll or other unofficial information regarding the final results of the electoral process. Both channels were closed on the afternoon of 20 May and reopened the next morning.\nInternet.\nBroadband Internet access.\nThe Dominican Republic is considered one of the countries with the most advanced telecommunications infrastructures in Latin America, with over 8.9\u00a0million cell phones connected (on just about 10 million populants, with 3.5\u00a0million of them on extreme poverty conditions) and large companies like Codetel and Orange (FR) on the telecommunications market. Broadband Internet access is growing, with over 622,931 Internet accounts globally and 3,851,278 Internet users as of December 2010 according to INDOTEL (DR Telecommunications Institute). Broadband DSL represents about 56% of the total Internet subscribers. There is access to regular ADSL, G.SHDSL, and services only on metropolitan areas, costs are high and service is decent. Cable Internet is offered by a couple of cable companies at lower costs than ADSL but the service is very deficient and unreliable. WiFi is becoming more common. It is available in some universities. Most hotels also offer wi-fi internet. The implementation of the WiMAX and HSPA technology by some of the Cellphone service providers are resulting in the rapid investment by other providers in the market to match the new and faster platform of services. Mobile broadband users have seen their percentage grow from 14% in 2007 all the way to 39% in 2010, and will continue to grow as more and more users are opting for this type of technology in a country where Home Broadband speeds are more expensive and slower. Also the ongoing installation of a Fiber-Optic network structure in the National District and the City of Santiago (second largest in the country) will force other competitors into upgrading theirs to be able to compete in the markets they now lead.\nPricing.\nAs of October 2018, not including taxes.\nKey: DOP: Dominican peso, USD: United States dollar. Exchange rate ( $50 DOP : US$1 )\nThe following table shows the speeds/prices* available and designed for home usage. \nCurrently the mobile internet market is governed by three aspects:\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight.\nThe constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system ensure freedom of speech and press. The independent media are active and express a wide variety of views without restriction. Individuals and groups are generally able to criticize the government publicly and privately without reprisal, although there have been incidents in which authorities intimidated journalists or other news professionals. Local journalists engage in self-censorship, particularly when coverage could adversely affect the economic or political interests of media owners. The government denies using unauthorized wiretapping or other surreptitious methods to interfere with the private lives of individuals and families, however, human rights groups and opposition politicians allege that such interference does occur."}
{"id": "8069", "revid": "1243047380", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8069", "title": "Transport in the Dominican Republic", "text": " \nTransport in the Dominican Republic utilizes a system of roads, airports, ports, harbours, and an urban railway.\nRoadways.\nFive main highways (DR-1, DR-2, DR-3, DR-4, DR-5) connect the Dominican Republic's biggest cities and tourist centers; they are in good condition. There are nearly of highways and roads, 9,872 being paved and (2002 est.) unpaved. Like any underdeveloped nation, the Dominican Republic suffers from a lack of good paved roads to connect smaller towns and less populated areas, though work on paving them proceeds. Major town roads are kept in good condition.\nPublic transportation.\nMass transit.\nThe Santo Domingo Metro is the first mass transit system in the country, and the second among Caribbean &amp; Central American nations. It is the most extensive metro system in the region by length and total number of stations. On February 27, 2008, the incumbent president Leonel Fern\u00e1ndez test-rode the system for the first time, and thereafter free service was offered several times. Commercial service began on January 30, 2009. Several additional lines are currently planned.\nSantiago Light Rail is a planned light rail system, still at the development stage, in the Dominican Republic's second-largest city Santiago de los Caballeros. Construction was slated to begin in mid-2008 but is currently on hold, due to lack of approval and of central government funds.\nBuses.\nThe Dominican Republic has a bus system that is rather reliable, and most of these public transportation vehicles are fairly comfortable. The fare is generally inexpensive, and there are bus terminals and stops in most of the island's major cities.\nPublic Cars (\"Carros P\u00fablicos\").\nThe Public Cars (\"Carros P\u00fablicos\u2013Conchos\") are privately owned passenger cars that transit a specific route daily Passengers may request a stop anywhere along the route. Carros P\u00fablicos carry a significant portion of commuters in Santo Domingo and other major cities. The system is not very reliable and lacks oversight and regulation which leads to congestion and other issues. They may also be somewhat uncomfortable, since drivers try to fit as many people as possible inside the vehicles. Carros P\u00fablicos are often standard sedans, but can be packed with as many as six passengers.\nRailways.\nRail operations are provided by one state-owned operator and several private operators (mainly for sugar mills). There are no rail connections with neighboring Haiti.\nPorts and harbors.\nMajor ports and harbours in the Dominican Republic:\nPorts.\nThe following six local ports are a single pier with berth facility:\nA local ferry service runs daily between the Saman\u00e1 and Sabana del Mar ports.\nEntering the ports.\nBoaters and sailors who wish to dock in any of the Dominican Republic's ports must follow certain entry requirements: \nAirports.\nIn 2009, there were seven major and 31 minor airports in the Dominican Republic. The major ones were:\nNational airlines.\nFlights.\nThere are direct flights to and from the Dominican Republic from the United States, Cuba, Canada, Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia, Argentina, Brazil, Europe and the Caribbean."}
{"id": "8070", "revid": "13370122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8070", "title": "Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic", "text": "The Dominican Armed Forces, also referred as Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic (), are the military forces of the Dominican Republic. These are made up of three branches: the Army, the Navy and the Air Force. The president of the Republic is the commander in chief of the Dominican Armed Forces and the Ministry of Defense (Spanish: \"Ministerio de Defensa de la Rep\u00fablica Dominicana\") is the chief managing body of the armed forces.\nAs a Ministry, its origin comes from the Dominican Constitution of 1844, as the Secretary of State for War and Navy. Its ministerial headquarters is located in Santo Domingo, in the Plaza de la Bandera. The primary missions of the Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic are to defend the nation and protect the territorial integrity of the country.\nThe Armed Forces of Dominican Republic are the strongest army in the Caribbean after Cuba. The Army, consists of six infantry brigades, an air cavalry squadron and a combat service support brigade. The Air Force operates two main bases, one in southern region near Santo Domingo and one in the northern region of the country, the air force operates approximately 75 aircraft including helicopters. The Navy maintains three ageing vessels which were donated from the United States, around 25 patrol crafts and interceptor boats and two helicopters.\nThere is a counter-terrorist group formed by members of the three branches. This group is highly trained in counter-terrorism missions. The armed forces participate fully in counter-illegal drug trade efforts, for this task, there is a taskforce known as DEPROSER 24/7 (DEfender, PROteger y SERvir). They also are active in efforts to control contraband and illegal immigration from Haiti to the Dominican Republic and from the Dominican Republic to the United States (via illegal transportation of immigrants to Puerto Rico).\nHistory.\nWar of Independence.\nHaiti under their president Jean-Pierre Boyer had invaded and occupied Dominican Republic from 1822 to 1844. The military forces of the First Republic's army comprised about 4,000 soldiers organized into seven line infantry regiments, several loose battalions, 6 escudrones cavalry and 3 artillery brigades with 2/2 brigades; This army was supplemented with national civic guard militia composed of the provinces, the National Naval Armada, original name of the Navy today; It composed of 10 ships, seven owned and 3 taken in requici\u00f3n and armed by the government: the Cibao frigate with 20 cannons; the brigantine schooner San Jose, five guns; the schooner La Libertad, five guns; General schooner Santana 7 guns; the schooner La Merced, five guns; Separation schooner, 3 guns; the schooner February 27, five guns. The requisition taken: the schooner Maria Luisa, 3 guns; the schooner March 30, 3 guns; and the schooner Hope, 3 guns. 674 operated by a man. In addition to the aforementioned military corps expeditionary southern army recruited by Pedro and Ramon Santana in Hato Mayor and El Seibo, with a permit issued by the Central Governing Board with the rank of commander in chief of the army existed. These men were skilled in handling machete and spear. His deputy commander was Brigadier General Antonio Duverg\u00e9. The other expeditionary army was the Northern Borders created to defend these borders: its commander was Major General Francisco A. Salcedo.\nThe Dominican forces would reach levels of organization and efficiency of considerable notoriety. As an example of this, it would suffice to highlight the fact of the achievement and preservation of National Independence, with the Dominican victory over repeated Haitian military invasions in the 12-year period that followed the proclamation of Independence; In addition, 55 percent of the National Budget was allocated to it.\n20th century.\nThe events that led to the United States military intervention of 1916, brought about the disappearance of any vestige of military structure in the Dominican Republic, setting the intervening forces a military government headed by Captain William Knapp, who make an interim police force called \"Constabulary \"equivalent to an\" armed police force as a military unit \"and he had the task of maintaining internal order and enforce the implementing provisions of the US government. This body, purely police function disappears in 1917, leading to the creation of a National Guard. As a result of this historic event of our recent past, the country inherited a hierarchical and organizational akin to the US Marine Corps structure, which served as a platform to the transformations that later gave rise to the armed forces we know today, made up of three components, terrestrial one, one naval and one air.\nThis land component, now called the National Army, inherited by both its organizational structure of the National Guard organized by the US occupation forces, which operated from April 7, 1917, until June 1921, when it becomes Dominican National Police by Executive Order No. 631 of Rear Admiral Thomas Snowden, who was at that time the military governor of Santo Domingo. After the US military occupation in 1924, Horacio V\u00e1squez wins the presidential elections of that same year. Among his first decisions, decrees the change of the Dominican National Police in National Brigade, a situation that continues until 17 May 1928, when new turn changes the name of the Army by Law No. 928, but basically inheriting a structure Police, who obeyed schemes imposition of public order demanded by the country at that time and not those of an army in their typical roles.\nDue to its characteristics and missions, organizational structure that demanded presence throughout the country, which was realized with the creation of posts and detachments in different parts of the country and the establishment in some provinces of company size units, many of which still Army retains today. Over the years and already existing National Police created by decree No. 1523 of March 2, 1936, of President Trujillo, many of these units, posts and detachments became part of it, perfectly adapted to its structure, since These were essentially created to play a policing role. So great was the influence that had the National Guard in Dominican society and very particularly in the rural population, which even today are many Dominicans who often referred to the Armed Forces and unique way to the Army as \" The Guard \".\nMeanwhile, the Navy has remained since its inception attached to the principles that gave rise, assuming only two name changes since its inception, but gradually evolving the transformation of what was a body created for military purposes, capable of landing and ships with weapons to face possible naval invasions, to be a component mainly responsible for enforcing the provisions on navigation, trade and fishing, as well as international treaties\nThe Air Force, meanwhile, emerges as an independent component in 1948, under the chairmanship of Generalissimo Rafael L. Trujillo Molina, with characteristics of innovation and modernism, which gave mobility, versatility and depth to the Armed Forces and the complement in the following years would become: a military capacity to project military power in the Caribbean environment. The situation of this air component has changed significantly after reaching its climax in the 50s, when it was one of the best air force equipped in the region, which was due to the strategic guidelines of a long-lived military dictatorship It made efforts to stay in power and he saw in this component one of its mainstays against any invasion or subversion against the dictatorship.\nComponents.\nArmy of the Dominican Republic.\nThe Dominican Army was founded in 1844. Its basic strength is concentrated in light infantry, which in general can be said to be well equipped with basic combat rifles and combat equipment for soldiers. The vehicles, both transport and armored, and the artillery and anti-tank pieces that it has in service, are partly in poor condition, obsolete or simply civilian vehicles adapted for military use. Nowadays, tanks and modern armor systems have been included.\nNavy of the Dominican Republic.\nThe Dominican Navy was founded in 1844 also with the National Independence with 15,000 troops after Haiti had occupied the eastern part of the island for twenty five years. It keeps around 34 ships in operation, mostly coast guards, patrol boats and small speedboats. It also operates dredges, tugboats and patrol boats of height. The Navy has a small air body composed helicopter utilities Bell OH-58 Kiowa.\nThe Dominican Navy operates two main bases, one in the port of Santo Domingo in the Dominican capital called \"\"Naval Base 27 de Febrero\" and another in Bah\u00eda de las Calderas, in the province of Peravia, called \"Las Calderas Naval Base\"\" in the southern part from the country. It also has presence in the commercial ports of the country, comandancias of ports and is divided into three naval areas that in turn have posts and naval detachments.\nAir Force of the Dominican Republic.\nThe Dominican Air Force was founded in 1948 with 20,000 people. It has two main bases: the base area of San Isidro in the South-Central zone of the country near the capital city Santo Domingo; and the other operates jointly in the civil facilities belonging to the Gregorio Luper\u00f3n International Airport, near the city of Puerto Plata in the North of the Republic. Until August 2009, the possibility of starting military operations from the Mar\u00eda Montez airport, in the city of Barahona in the Southwest of the country and from the Punta Cana airport in the extreme east is under study.\nIt keeps the following fixed-wing aircraft in operation: 8 Embraer EMB 314 Super Tucano, 3 CASA C-212 Aviocar transport; 6 T35B Pilot training; as well as around 25 helicopters such as Bell 206, Bell UH-1 Iroquois, Bell OH-58 Kiowa, Eurocopter Dauphin, OH-6 Cayuse and Sikorsky S-300.\nSpecialized Security Corps.\nThe Specialized Security Corps are military security agencies dependent on the Ministry of Defense and they are made up of military and civilian personnel specialized in their different areas of function. Overall their duty is to support state institutions, defend national interests in peace and war, and as force multipliers of the Armed Forces as well as the National Police.\nMilitary training and formation.\nThe Higher Institute for Defense \"General General Juan Pablo Duarte y Diez\" (\"INSUDE\") is the agency dependent on the Ministry of Defense of the Dominican Republic and rector of the graduate schools, academies, technical schools, specialized schools for military training and training that constitute the Education System of the Armed Forces, as stipulated in article 205 of Law 139-13 of the Armed Forces. \"INSUDE\" was created as the Specialized Institute for Higher Studies of the Armed Forces (IEESFA) by Decree 1110-03 of December 2, 2003 and designated with its current name by decree 38-09 of January 17, 2009.\nMilitary training for officers of the Armed Forces is carried out by institutions specialized in each component. The Batalla de las Carreras Military Academy aims to train future officers of the National Army. The academy grants a bachelor's degree in Military Sciences lasting 4 years and 3 months.\nThe Naval Academy, whose purpose is to train officers of the Navy, grants a bachelor's degree in Naval Sciences with a duration of 4 years.\nThe Aerial, whose function is to train Air Force officers, offers a bachelor's degree in Aeronautical Sciences in three independent modalities: Aviator Mention, Infantry Mention and Aeronautical Maintenance Mention, all three with a duration of 4 years."}
{"id": "8071", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8071", "title": "Foreign relations of the Dominican Republic", "text": " \nThe foreign relations of the Dominican Republic are the Dominican Republic's relations with other governments.\nThe Dominican Republic has a close relationship with the United States and with the other states of the Inter-American system. It has accredited diplomatic missions in most Western Hemisphere countries and in principal European capitals.\nHistory.\nThe island nation of the Dominican Republic maintains very limited relations with most of the countries of Africa, Asia, the Middle East, and Eastern Europe. It concentrated its diplomatic activities in four critical arenas: the circum-Caribbean, countries in the Americas, the United States, and Western Europe (mainly West Germany, Spain, and France).\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which the Dominican Republic maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nMultilateral relations.\nThe Dominican Republic is a founding member of the United Nations and many of its specialized and related agencies, including the World Bank, International Labour Organization, International Atomic Energy Agency, and International Civil Aviation Organization. It also is a member of the OAS, World Trade Organization, World Health Organization, World Customs Organization the Inter-American Development Bank, Central American Integration System, and ACP Group."}
{"id": "8072", "revid": "24946975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8072", "title": "Disease", "text": "A disease is a particular abnormal condition that adversely affects the structure or function of all or part of an organism and is not immediately due to any external injury. Diseases are often known to be medical conditions that are associated with specific signs and symptoms. A disease may be caused by external factors such as pathogens or by internal dysfunctions. For example, internal dysfunctions of the immune system can produce a variety of different diseases, including various forms of immunodeficiency, hypersensitivity, allergies, and autoimmune disorders.\nIn humans, \"disease\" is often used more broadly to refer to any condition that causes pain, dysfunction, distress, social problems, or death to the person affected, or similar problems for those in contact with the person. In this broader sense, it sometimes includes injuries, disabilities, disorders, syndromes, infections, isolated symptoms, deviant behaviors, and atypical variations of structure and function, while in other contexts and for other purposes these may be considered distinguishable categories. Diseases can affect people not only physically but also mentally, as contracting and living with a disease can alter the affected person's perspective on life.\nDeath due to disease is called death by natural causes. There are four main types of disease: infectious diseases, deficiency diseases, hereditary diseases (including both genetic and non-genetic hereditary diseases), and physiological diseases. Diseases can also be classified in other ways, such as communicable versus non-communicable diseases. The deadliest diseases in humans are coronary artery disease (blood flow obstruction), followed by cerebrovascular disease and lower respiratory infections. In developed countries, the diseases that cause the most sickness overall are neuropsychiatric conditions, such as depression and anxiety.\nThe study of disease is called \"pathology\", which includes the study of \"etiology\", or cause.\nTerminology.\nConcepts.\nIn many cases, terms such as \"disease\", \"disorder\", \"morbidity\", \"sickness\" and \"illness\" are used interchangeably; however, there are situations when specific terms are considered preferable.\nStages.\nIn an infectious disease, the incubation period is the time between infection and the appearance of symptoms. The latency period is the time between infection and the ability of the disease to spread to another person, which may precede, follow, or be simultaneous with the appearance of symptoms. Some viruses also exhibit a dormant phase, called viral latency, in which the virus hides in the body in an inactive state. For example, varicella zoster virus causes chickenpox in the acute phase; after recovery from chickenpox, the virus may remain dormant in nerve cells for many years, and later cause herpes zoster (shingles).\nClassification.\nDiseases may be classified by cause, pathogenesis (mechanism by which the disease is caused), or by symptoms. Alternatively, diseases may be classified according to the organ system involved, though this is often complicated since many diseases affect more than one organ.\nA chief difficulty in nosology is that diseases often cannot be defined and classified clearly, especially when cause or pathogenesis are unknown. Thus diagnostic terms often only reflect a symptom or set of symptoms (syndrome).\nClassical classification of human disease derives from the observational correlation between pathological analysis and clinical syndromes. Today it is preferred to classify them by their cause if it is known.\nThe most known and used classification of diseases is the World Health Organization's ICD. This is periodically updated. Currently, the last publication is the ICD-11.\nCauses.\nDiseases can be caused by any number of factors and may be acquired or congenital. Microorganisms, genetics, the environment or a combination of these can contribute to a diseased state. \nOnly some diseases such as influenza are contagious and commonly believed infectious. The microorganisms that cause these diseases are known as pathogens and include varieties of bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and fungi. Infectious diseases can be transmitted, e.g. by hand-to-mouth contact with infectious material on surfaces, by bites of insects or other carriers of the disease, and from contaminated water or food (often via fecal contamination), etc. Also, there are sexually transmitted diseases. In some cases, microorganisms that are not readily spread from person to person play a role, while other diseases can be prevented or ameliorated with appropriate nutrition or other lifestyle changes.\nSome diseases, such as most (but not all) forms of cancer, heart disease, and mental disorders, are non-infectious diseases. Many non-infectious diseases have a partly or completely genetic basis (see genetic disorder) and may thus be transmitted from one generation to another.\nSocial determinants of health are the social conditions in which people live that determine their health. Illnesses are generally related to social, economic, political, and environmental circumstances. Social determinants of health have been recognized by several health organizations such as the Public Health Agency of Canada and the World Health Organization to greatly influence collective and personal well-being. The World Health Organization's Social Determinants Council also recognizes Social determinants of health in poverty.\nWhen the cause of a disease is poorly understood, societies tend to mythologize the disease or use it as a metaphor or symbol of whatever that culture considers evil. For example, until the bacterial cause of tuberculosis was discovered in 1882, experts variously ascribed the disease to heredity, a sedentary lifestyle, depressed mood, and overindulgence in sex, rich food, or alcohol, all of which were social ills at the time.\nWhen a disease is caused by a pathogenic organism (e.g., when malaria is caused by \"Plasmodium\"), one should not confuse the pathogen (the cause of the disease) with disease itself. For example, West Nile virus (the pathogen) causes West Nile fever (the disease). The misuse of basic definitions in epidemiology is frequent in scientific publications.\nPrevention.\nMany diseases and disorders can be prevented through a variety of means. These include sanitation, proper nutrition, adequate exercise, vaccinations and other self-care and public health measures, .\nTreatments.\nMedical therapies or treatments are efforts to cure or improve a disease or other health problems. In the medical field, therapy is synonymous with the word \"treatment\". Among psychologists, the term may refer specifically to psychotherapy or \"talk therapy\". Common treatments include medications, surgery, medical devices, and self-care. Treatments may be provided by an organized health care system, or informally, by the patient or family members.\nPreventive healthcare is a way to avoid an injury, sickness, or disease in the first place. A treatment or cure is applied after a medical problem has already started. A treatment attempts to improve or remove a problem, but treatments may not produce permanent cures, especially in chronic diseases. Cures are a subset of treatments that reverse diseases completely or end medical problems permanently. Many diseases that cannot be completely cured are still treatable. Pain management (also called pain medicine) is that branch of medicine employing an interdisciplinary approach to the relief of pain and improvement in the quality of life of those living with pain.\nTreatment for medical emergencies must be provided promptly, often through an emergency department or, in less critical situations, through an urgent care facility.\nEpidemiology.\nEpidemiology is the study of the factors that cause or encourage diseases. Some diseases are more common in certain geographic areas, among people with certain genetic or socioeconomic characteristics, or at different times of the year.\nEpidemiology is considered a cornerstone methodology of public health research and is highly regarded in evidence-based medicine for identifying risk factors for diseases. In the study of communicable and non-communicable diseases, the work of epidemiologists ranges from outbreak investigation to study design, data collection, and analysis including the development of statistical models to test hypotheses and the documentation of results for submission to peer-reviewed journals. Epidemiologists also study the interaction of diseases in a population, a condition known as a syndemic. Epidemiologists rely on a number of other scientific disciplines such as biology (to better understand disease processes), biostatistics (the current raw information available), Geographic Information Science (to store data and map disease patterns) and social science disciplines (to better understand proximate and distal risk factors). Epidemiology can help identify causes as well as guide prevention efforts.\nIn studying diseases, epidemiology faces the challenge of defining them. Especially for poorly understood diseases, different groups might use significantly different definitions. Without an agreed-on definition, different researchers may report different numbers of cases and characteristics of the disease.\nSome morbidity databases are compiled with data supplied by states and territories health authorities, at national levels or larger scale (such as European Hospital Morbidity Database (HMDB)) which may contain hospital discharge data by detailed diagnosis, age and sex. The European HMDB data was submitted by European countries to the World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe.\nBurdens of disease.\nDisease burden is the impact of a health problem in an area measured by financial cost, mortality, morbidity, or other indicators.\nThere are several measures used to quantify the burden imposed by diseases on people. The years of potential life lost (YPLL) is a simple estimate of the number of years that a person's life was shortened due to a disease. For example, if a person dies at the age of 65 from a disease, and would probably have lived until age 80 without that disease, then that disease has caused a loss of 15 years of potential life. YPLL measurements do not account for how disabled a person is before dying, so the measurement treats a person who dies suddenly and a person who died at the same age after decades of illness as equivalent. In 2004, the World Health Organization calculated that 932 million years of potential life were lost to premature death.\nThe quality-adjusted life year (QALY) and disability-adjusted life year (DALY) metrics are similar but take into account whether the person was healthy after diagnosis. In addition to the number of years lost due to premature death, these measurements add part of the years lost to being sick. Unlike YPLL, these measurements show the burden imposed on people who are very sick, but who live a normal lifespan. A disease that has high morbidity, but low mortality, has a high DALY and a low YPLL. In 2004, the World Health Organization calculated that 1.5\u00a0billion disability-adjusted life years were lost to disease and injury. In the developed world, heart disease and stroke cause the most loss of life, but neuropsychiatric conditions like major depressive disorder cause the most years lost to being sick.\nSociety and culture.\nHow a society responds to diseases is the subject of medical sociology.\nA condition may be considered a disease in some cultures or eras but not in others. For example, obesity was associated with prosperity and abundance, and this perception persists in many African regions, especially since the beginning of the HIV/AIDS. Epilepsy is considered a sign of spiritual gifts among the Hmong people.\nSickness confers the social legitimization of certain benefits, such as illness benefits, work avoidance, and being looked after by others. The person who is sick takes on a social role called the sick role. A person who responds to a dreaded disease, such as cancer, in a culturally acceptable fashion may be publicly and privately honored with higher social status. In return for these benefits, the sick person is obligated to seek treatment and work to become well once more. As a comparison, consider pregnancy, which is not interpreted as a disease or sickness, even if the mother and baby may both benefit from medical care.\nMost religions grant exceptions from religious duties to people who are sick. For example, one whose life would be endangered by fasting on Yom Kippur or during the month of Ramadan is exempted from the requirement, or even forbidden from participating. People who are sick are also exempted from social duties. For example, ill health is the only socially acceptable reason for an American to refuse an invitation to the White House.\nThe identification of a condition as a disease, rather than as simply a variation of human structure or function, can have significant social or economic implications. The controversial recognition of diseases such as repetitive stress injury (RSI) and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has had a number of positive and negative effects on the financial and other responsibilities of governments, corporations, and institutions towards individuals, as well as on the individuals themselves. The social implication of viewing aging as a disease could be profound, though this classification is not yet widespread.\nLepers were people who were historically shunned because they had an infectious disease, and the term \"leper\" still evokes social stigma. Fear of disease can still be a widespread social phenomenon, though not all diseases evoke extreme social stigma.\nSocial standing and economic status affect health. Diseases of poverty are diseases that are associated with poverty and low social status; diseases of affluence are diseases that are associated with high social and economic status. Which diseases are associated with which states vary according to time, place, and technology. Some diseases, such as diabetes mellitus, may be associated with both poverty (poor food choices) and affluence (long lifespans and sedentary lifestyles), through different mechanisms. The term \"lifestyle diseases\" describes diseases associated with longevity and that are more common among older people. For example, cancer is far more common in societies in which most members live until they reach the age of 80 than in societies in which most members die before they reach the age of 50.\nLanguage of disease.\nAn illness narrative is a way of organizing a medical experience into a coherent story that illustrates the sick individual's personal experience.\nPeople use metaphors to make sense of their experiences with disease. The metaphors move disease from an objective thing that exists to an affective experience. The most popular metaphors draw on military concepts: Disease is an enemy that must be feared, fought, battled, and routed. The patient or the healthcare provider is a warrior, rather than a passive victim or bystander. The agents of communicable diseases are invaders; non-communicable diseases constitute internal insurrection or civil war. Because the threat is urgent, perhaps a matter of life and death, unthinkably radical, even oppressive, measures are society's and the patient's moral duty as they courageously mobilize to struggle against destruction. The War on Cancer is an example of this metaphorical use of language. This language is empowering to some patients, but leaves others feeling like they are failures.\nAnother class of metaphors describes the experience of illness as a journey: The person travels to or from a place of disease, and changes himself, discovers new information, or increases his experience along the way. He may travel \"on the road to recovery\" or make changes to \"get on the right track\" or choose \"pathways\". Some are explicitly immigration-themed: the patient has been exiled from the home territory of health to the land of the ill, changing identity and relationships in the process. This language is more common among British healthcare professionals than the language of physical aggression.\nSome metaphors are disease-specific. Slavery is a common metaphor for addictions: The alcoholic is enslaved by drink, and the smoker is captive to nicotine. Some cancer patients treat the loss of their hair from chemotherapy as a metonymy or metaphor for all the losses caused by the disease.\nSome diseases are used as metaphors for social ills: \"Cancer\" is a common description for anything that is endemic and destructive in society, such as poverty, injustice, or racism. AIDS was seen as a divine judgment for moral decadence, and only by purging itself from the \"pollution\" of the \"invader\" could society become healthy again. More recently, when AIDS seemed less threatening, this type of emotive language was applied to avian flu and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Authors in the 19th century commonly used tuberculosis as a symbol and a metaphor for transcendence. People with the disease were portrayed in literature as having risen above daily life to become ephemeral objects of spiritual or artistic achievement. In the 20th century, after its cause was better understood, the same disease became the emblem of poverty, squalor, and other social problems."}
{"id": "8073", "revid": "23827881", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8073", "title": "Dardanelles", "text": "The Dardanelles ( ; ; ), also known as the Strait of Gallipoli (after the Gallipoli peninsula) and in Classical Antiquity as the Hellespont ( ; ), is a narrow, natural strait and internationally significant waterway in northwestern Turkey that forms part of the continental boundary between Asia and Europe and separates Asian Turkey from European Turkey. Together with the Bosporus, the Dardanelles forms the Turkish Straits.\nOne of the world's narrowest straits used for international navigation, the Dardanelles connects the Sea of Marmara with the Aegean and Mediterranean seas while also allowing passage to the Black Sea by extension via the Bosporus. The Dardanelles is long and wide. It has an average depth of with a maximum depth of at its narrowest point abreast the city of \u00c7anakkale. The first fixed crossing across the Dardanelles opened in 2022 with the completion of the 1915 \u00c7anakkale Bridge.\nMost of the northern shores of the strait along the Gallipoli peninsula () are sparsely settled, while the southern shores along the Troad peninsula () are inhabited by the city of \u00c7anakkale's urban population of 110,000.\nNames.\nThe contemporary Turkish name , meaning ' Strait', is derived from the eponymous midsize city that adjoins the strait, itself meaning 'pottery fort'\u2014from (, 'pottery') + (, 'fortress')\u2014in reference to the area's famous pottery and ceramic wares, and the landmark Ottoman fortress of Sultaniye.\nThe English name \"Dardanelles\" is an abbreviation of \"Strait of the Dardanelles\". During Ottoman times there was a castle on each side of the strait. These castles together were called the \"Dardanelles\", probably named after Dardanus, an ancient city on the Asian shore of the strait which in turn was said to take its name from Dardanus, the mythical son of Zeus and Electra. The name comes from the Dardani in the Balkans, according to Papazoglu.\nThe ancient Greek name () means \"Sea of Helle\", and was the ancient name of the narrow strait. It was variously named in classical literature , , and . It was so called from Helle, the daughter of Athamas, who was drowned here in the mythology of the Golden Fleece.\nGeography.\nAs a maritime waterway, the Dardanelles connects various seas along the Eastern Mediterranean, the Balkans, the Near East, and Western Eurasia, and specifically connects the Aegean Sea to the Sea of Marmara. The Marmara further connects to the Black Sea via the Bosporus, while the Aegean further links to the Mediterranean. Thus, the Dardanelles allows maritime connections from the Black Sea all the way to the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean via Gibraltar, and the Indian Ocean through the Suez Canal, making it a crucial international waterway, in particular for the passage of goods coming in from Russia.\nThe strait is located at approximately .\nPresent morphology.\nThe strait is long, and wide, averaging deep with a maximum depth of at its narrowest point at Nara Burnu, abreast \u00c7anakkale. There are two major currents through the strait: a surface current flows from the Black Sea towards the Aegean Sea, and a more saline undercurrent flows in the opposite direction.\nThe Dardanelles is unique in many respects. The very narrow and winding shape of the strait is more akin to that of a river. It is considered one of the most hazardous, crowded, difficult and potentially dangerous waterways in the world. The currents produced by the tidal action in the Black Sea and the Sea of Marmara are such that ships under sail must wait at anchorage for the right conditions before entering the Dardanelles.\nHistory.\nAs part of the only passage between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean, the Dardanelles has always been of great importance from a commercial and military point of view, and remains strategically important today. It is a major sea access route for numerous countries, including Russia and Ukraine. Control over it has been an objective of a number of hostilities in modern history, notably the attack of the Allied Powers on the Dardanelles during the 1915 Battle of Gallipoli in the course of World War I.\nAncient Dardanian, Persian, Roman, and Byzantine eras (pre-1454).\nDardanian and Persian history.\nThe ancient city of Troy was located near the western entrance of the strait, and the strait's Asiatic shore was the focus of the Trojan War. Troy was able to control the marine traffic entering this vital waterway. The Persian army of Xerxes I of Persia and later the Macedonian army of Alexander the Great crossed the Dardanelles in opposite directions to invade each other's lands, in 480 BC and 334 BC respectively.\nHerodotus says that, circa 482 BC, Xerxes I (the son of Darius) had two pontoon bridges built across the width of the Hellespont at Abydos, in order that his huge army could cross from Persia into Greece. This crossing was named by Aeschylus in his tragedy \"The Persians\" as the cause of divine intervention against Xerxes.\nAccording to Herodotus (vv.34), both bridges were destroyed by a storm and Xerxes had those responsible for building the bridges beheaded and the strait itself whipped. The Histories of Herodotus vii.33\u201337 and vii.54\u201358 give details of building and crossing of Xerxes' Pontoon Bridges. Xerxes is then said to have thrown fetters into the strait, given it three hundred lashes with multiple whips and branded it with red-hot irons as the soldiers shouted at the water.\nHerodotus commented that this was a \"highly presumptuous way to address the Hellespont\" but in no way atypical of Xerxes. (vii.35)\nHarpalus the engineer is said to have eventually helped the invading armies to cross by lashing the ships together with their bows facing the current and adding two additional anchors to each ship. \nFrom the perspective of ancient Greek mythology Helle, the daughter of Athamas, supposedly was drowned at the Dardanelles in the legend of the Golden Fleece. Likewise, the strait was the scene of the legend of Hero and Leander, wherein the lovesick Leander swam the strait nightly in order to tryst with his beloved, the priestess Hero, but was ultimately drowned in a storm.\nByzantine history.\nThe Dardanelles were vital to the defence of Constantinople during the Byzantine period.\nAlso, the Dardanelles was an important source of income for the ruler of the region. At the Istanbul Archaeological Museum a marble plate contains a law by the Byzantine Emperor Anastasius I (491\u2013518 AD), that regulated fees for passage through the customs office of the Dardanelles. Translation:\n... Whoever dares to violate these regulations shall no longer be regarded as a friend, and he shall be punished. Besides, the administrator of the Dardanelles must have the right to receive 50 golden Litrons, so that these rules, which we make out of piety, shall never ever be violated... ... The distinguished governor and major of the capital, who already has both hands full of things to do, has turned to our lofty piety in order to reorganize the entry and exit of all ships through the Dardanelles... ... Starting from our day and also in the future, anybody who wants to pass through the Dardanelles must pay the following: \n\u2013 All wine merchants who bring wine to the capital (Constantinopolis), except Cilicians, have to pay the Dardanelles officials 6 follis and 2 sextarius of wine. \n\u2013 In the same manner, all merchants of olive-oil, vegetables and lard must pay the Dardanelles officials 6 follis. Cilician sea-merchants have to pay 3 follis and in addition to that, 1 keration (12 follis) to enter, and 2 keration to exit.\n\u2013 All wheat merchants have to pay the officials 3 follis per modius, and a further sum of 3 follis when leaving.\nSince the 14th century the Dardanelles have almost continuously been controlled by the Turks.\nOttoman era (1354\u20131922).\nThe Dardanelles continued to constitute an important waterway during the period of the Ottoman Empire, which conquered Gallipoli in 1354.\nOttoman control of the strait continued largely without interruption or challenges until the 19th century, when the Empire started its decline.\nNineteenth century.\nGaining control of, or guaranteed access to, the strait became a key foreign-policy goal of the Russian Empire during the 19th century. During the Napoleonic Wars, Russia\u2014supported by Great Britain in the Dardanelles Operation\u2014blockaded the straits in 1807. \nIn 1833, following the Ottoman Empire's defeat in the Russo-Turkish War of 1828\u20131829, Russia pressured the Ottomans to sign the Treaty of Hunkiar Iskelesi\u2014which required the closing of the straits to warships of non-Black Sea powers at Russia's request. That would have effectively given Russia a free hand in the Black Sea.\nThis treaty alarmed the Ottoman Empire, who were concerned that the consequences of potential Russian expansionism in the Black Sea and Mediterranean regions could conflict with their own possessions and economic interest in the region. At the London Straits Convention in July 1841, the United Kingdom, France, Austria, and Prussia pressured Russia to agree that only Turkish warships could traverse the Dardanelles in peacetime. The United Kingdom and France subsequently sent their fleets through the straits to defend the Danube front and to attack the Crimean Peninsula during the Crimean War of 1853\u20131856 \u2013 but they did so as allies of the Ottoman Empire. Following the defeat of Russia in the Crimean War, the Congress of Paris in 1856 formally reaffirmed the London Straits Convention.\nWorld War I.\nIn 1915 the Allies sent a substantial invasion force of British, Indian, Australian, New Zealand, French and Newfoundland troops to attempt to open up the straits. In the Gallipoli campaign, Turkish troops trapped the Allies on the coasts of the Gallipoli peninsula. The campaign damaged the career of Winston Churchill, then First Lord of the Admiralty (in office 1911\u20131915), who had eagerly promoted the (unsuccessful) use of Royal Navy sea power to force open the straits. Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk, subsequent founder of the Republic of Turkey, served as an Ottoman commander during the land campaign.\nThe Turks mined the straits to prevent Allied ships from penetrating them but, in minor actions two submarines, one British and one Australian, did succeed in penetrating the minefields. The British submarine sank an obsolete Turkish pre-dreadnought battleship off the Golden Horn of Istanbul. Sir Ian Hamilton's Mediterranean Expeditionary Force failed in its attempt to capture the Gallipoli peninsula, and the British cabinet ordered its withdrawal in December 1915, after eight months' fighting. Total Allied deaths included 41,000 British and Irish, 15,000 French, 8,700 Australians, 2,700 New Zealanders, 1,370 Indians and 49 Newfoundlanders. Total Turkish deaths were around 60,000.\nFollowing the war, the 1920 Treaty of S\u00e8vres demilitarized the strait and made it an international territory under the control of the League of Nations. The Ottoman Empire's non-ethnically Turkish territories were broken up and partitioned among the Allied Powers, and Turkish jurisdiction over the straits curbed.\nTurkish republican and modern eras (1923\u2013present).\nAfter the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire following a lengthy campaign by Turks as part of the Turkish War of Independence against both the Allied Powers and the Ottoman court, the Republic of Turkey was created in 1923 by the Treaty of Lausanne, which established most of the modern sovereign territory of Turkey and restored the straits to Turkish territory, with the condition that Turkey keep them demilitarized and allow all foreign warships and commercial shipping to traverse the straits freely.\nAs part of its national security strategy, Turkey eventually rejected the terms of the treaty, and subsequently remilitarized the straits area over the following decade. Following extensive diplomatic negotiations, the reversion was formalized under the Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Turkish Straits on 20 July 1936. That convention, which is still in force today, treats the straits as an international shipping lane while allowing Turkey to retain the right to restrict the naval traffic of non-Black Sea states.\nDuring World War II, through February 1945, when Turkey was neutral for most of the length of the conflict, the Dardanelles were closed to the ships of the belligerent nations. Turkey declared war on Germany in February 1945, but it did not employ any offensive forces during the war.\nIn July 1946, the Soviet Union sent a note to Turkey proposing a new r\u00e9gime for the Dardanelles that would have excluded all nations except the Black Sea powers. The second proposal was that the straits should be put under joint Turkish-Soviet defence. This meant that Turkey, the Soviet Union, Bulgaria and Romania would be the only states having access to the Black Sea through the Dardanelles. The Turkish government however, under pressure from the United States, rejected these proposals.\nTurkey joined NATO in 1952, thus affording its straits even more strategic importance as a commercial and military waterway.\nIn more recent years, the Turkish Straits have become particularly important for the oil industry. Russian oil, from ports such as Novorossyisk, is exported by tankers primarily to western Europe and the U.S. via the Bosporus and the Dardanelles straits.\nThe Dardanelles were closed in late February 2022 to all foreign warships at the beginning of the Russian invasion of Ukraine in accordance with the Montreux Convention.\nCrossings.\nMaritime.\nThe waters of the Dardanelles are traversed by numerous passenger and vehicular ferries daily, as well as recreational and fishing boats ranging from dinghies to yachts owned by both public and private entities.\nThe strait also experiences significant amounts of commercial shipping traffic.\nLand.\nThe \u00c7anakkale 1915 Bridge joins Lapseki, a district of \u00c7anakkale, on the Asian side and S\u00fctl\u00fcce, a village of the Gelibolu district, on the European side. It is part of planned expansions to the Turkish National Highway Network. Work on the bridge began in March 2017, and it was opened on March 18, 2022.\nSubsea.\n2 submarine cable systems transmitting electric power at 400 kV bridge the Dardanelles to feed west and east of Istanbul. They have their own landing stations in Lapseki and S\u00fctl\u00fcce. The first, situated in the northeast quarter portion of the strait, was energised in April 2015 and provides 2 GW via 6 phases 400 kV AC 3.9\u00a0km far through the sea. The second, somewhat in the middle of the strait, was still under construction in June 2016 and will provide similar capabilities to the first line.\nBoth subsea power lines cross 4 optical fibre data lines laid earlier along the strait. A published map shows communication lines leading from Istanbul into the Mediterranean, named MedNautilus and landing at Athens, Sicily and elsewhere."}
{"id": "8074", "revid": "44360971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8074", "title": "Daugava", "text": "The Daugava ( ), also known as the Western Dvina or the V\u00e4ina River, is a large river rising in the Valdai Hills of Russia that flows through Belarus and Latvia into the Gulf of Riga of the Baltic Sea. The Daugava rises close to the source of the Volga. It is in length, of which are in Latvia and in Russia. It is a westward-flowing river, tracing out a great south-bending curve as it passes through northern Belarus.\nLatvia's capital, Riga, bridges the river's estuary four times. Built on both riverbanks, the city centre is from the river's mouth and is a significant port.\nEtymology.\nAccording to Max Vasmer's \"Etymological Dictionary\", the toponym Dvina cannot stem from a Uralic language; instead, it possibly comes from an Indo-European word which used to mean 'river' or 'stream'. The name \"Dvina\" resembles strongly \"Danuvius\" which itself derived from the Proto-Indo-European \"*d\u0101nu\", meaning 'large river'.\nThe Finno-Ugric names (Livonian), (Estonian), and (Finnish) all stem from Proto-Finnic \"*v\u00e4in\", which roughly translates to 'a large, peacefully rolling river'.\nGeography.\nThe total catchment area of the river is , of which are in Belarus.\nTributaries.\nThe following rivers are tributaries to the river Daugava (from source to mouth):\nHistory.\nHumans have settled at the mouth of the Daugava and along the shores of the Gulf of Riga for millennia, initially participating in a hunter-gatherer economy and utilizing the waters of the Daugava estuary for fishing and gathering. Beginning around the sixth century CE, Viking explorers crossed the Baltic Sea and entered the Daugava River, navigating upriver into the Baltic interior.\nIn medieval times, the Daugava was part of the trade route from the Varangians to the Greeks, an important route for the transport of furs from the north and of Byzantine silver from the south. The Riga area, inhabited by the Finnic-speaking Livs, became a key location of settlement and defence of the mouth of the Daugava at least as early as the Middle Ages, as evidenced by the now destroyed fort at Tor\u0146akalns on the west bank of the Daugava in present-day Riga.\nFrom the end of the Livonian War great part of the Daugava formed the northeastern border of Duchy of Courland and Semigallia saparating it initially from the Kingdom of Livonia, later Swedish Livonia and Riga Governorate.\nAfter the incorporation later in the Russian Empire the river formed a border between governorates of Courland on the western bank and Livonia and Vitebsk on the eastern bank.\nFrom 1936 to 1939 \u0136egums Hydroelectric Power Station was built on the Daugava river in Latvia. P\u013cavi\u0146as Hydroelectric Power Station was put into operation in 1968 and Riga Hydroelectric Power Plant in 1974.\nSettlements.\nThe following are some of the cities and towns built along the Daugava:\nEnvironment.\nThe river began experiencing environmental deterioration in the Soviet era due to collective agriculture (producing considerable adverse water pollution runoff) and hydroelectric power projects. This is the river that the Vula river flows into.\nWater quality.\nUpstream of the Latvian town of Jekabpils, the river's pH has a characteristic value of about 7.8 (slight alkaline). In this area, the concentration of ionic calcium is around 43 milligrams per liter, nitrate is about 0.82 milligrams per liter, ionic phosphate is 0.038 milligrams per liter, and oxygen saturation is 80%. The high nitrate and phosphate load of the Daugava has contributed to the extensive buildup of phytoplankton biomass in the Baltic Sea; the Oder and Vistula rivers also contribute to the high nutrient loading of the Baltic.\nIn Belarus, water pollution of the Daugava is considered moderately severe, with the chief sources being treated wastewater, fish-farming, and agricultural chemical runoff (such as herbicides, pesticides, nitrates, and phosphates)."}
{"id": "8075", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8075", "title": "Datsun", "text": "Datsun (, ) was a Japanese automobile manufacturer brand owned by Nissan. Datsun's original production run began in 1931. From 1958 to 1986, only vehicles exported by Nissan were identified as Datsun. Nissan phased out the Datsun brand in March 1986, but relaunched it in June 2013 as the brand for low-cost vehicles manufactured for emerging markets. Nissan considered phasing out the Datsun brand for a second time in 2019 and 2020, eventually discontinuing the struggling brand in April 2022.\nIn 1931, DAT Motorcar Co. chose to name its new small car \"Datson\", a name which indicated the new car's smaller size when compared to the DAT's larger vehicle already in production. When Nissan took control of DAT in 1934, the name \"Datson\" was changed to \"Datsun\", because \"son\" also means \"loss\" (\u640d \"son\") in Japanese, and to honour the sun depicted in the national flag \u2013 thus the name \"Datsun\": . The Datsun name is internationally well known for the 510, Fairlady roadsters, and the Z and ZX coup\u00e9s.\nHistory.\nOrigin of Datsun.\nBefore the Datsun brand name came into being, an automobile named the DAT car was built in 1914, by the , in the Azabu-Hiroo District in Tokyo. The new car's name was an acronym of the initials of the company partners:\nIncidentally, \"datto\" (how a native Japanese speaker would pronounce \"dat\") means to \"dash off like a startled rabbit\" (\u8131\u514e), which was considered a good name for the little car. The firm was renamed Kaishinsha Motorcar Co. in 1918, seven years after their establishment and again, in 1925, to DAT Motorcar Co. DAT Motors constructed trucks in addition to the DAT passenger cars. In fact, their output focused on trucks since there was almost no consumer market for passenger cars at the time. Beginning in 1918, the first DAT trucks were assembled for the military market. The low demand from the military market during the 1920s forced DAT to consider merging with other automotive industries. In 1926 the Tokyo-based DAT Motors merged with the Osaka-based also known as Jitsuyo Motors (established 1919, as a Kubota subsidiary) to become in Osaka until 1932. (Jitsuyo Jidosha began producing a three-wheeled vehicle with an enclosed cab called the Gorham in 1920, and the following year produced a four-wheeled version. From 1923 to 1925, the company produced light cars and trucks under the name of Lila.)\nThe DAT corporation had been selling full size cars to Japanese consumers under the DAT name since 1914. In 1930, the Japanese government created a ministerial ordinance that allowed cars with engines up to 500 cc to be driven without a license. DAT Automobile Manufacturing began development of a line of 495 cc cars to sell in this new market segment, calling the new small cars \"Datson\" \u2013 meaning \"Son of DAT\". The name was changed to \"Datsun\" two years later in 1933.\nThe first prototype Datson was completed in the summer of 1931. The production vehicle was called the Datson Type 10, and \"approximately ten\" of these cars were sold in 1931. They sold around 150 cars in 1932, now calling the model the Datsun Type 11. In 1933, government rules were revised to permit engines, and Datsun increased the displacement of their microcar engine to the maximum allowed. These larger displacement cars were called Type 12s.\nBy 1935, the company had established a true production line, following the example of Ford, and were producing a car closely resembling the Austin 7. There is evidence that six of these early Datsuns were exported to New Zealand in 1936, a market they then re-entered in May 1962. In 1937, Datsun's biggest pre-war year, 8593 were built, with some exported to Australia in knock-down form.\nAfter Japan went to war with China in 1937, passenger car production was restricted, so by 1938, Datsun's Yokohama plant concentrated on building trucks for the Imperial Japanese Army.\nWhen the Pacific War ended, Datsun would turn to provide trucks for the Occupation forces. This lasted until car production resumed in 1947. As before the war, Datsun closely patterned their cars on contemporary Austin products: postwar, the Devon and Somerset were selected. For Datsun's smaller cars (and trucks), such as the DB and DS series, they depended on designs based on the pre-war Austin Seven. The heavier trucks, meanwhile, were based on Chevrolet's 1937 design with an engine of Graham-Paige design. Nissan also built the 4W60 Patrol, based on the Willys Jeep, and the 4W70 Carrier, based on the Dodge M37. Not until January 1955 did Datsun offer a fully indigenous design.\nThat year, the Occupation returned production facilities to Japanese control, and Datsun introduced the 110 saloon and the 110-based 120 pickup.\nDatsun in the American market.\nThe use of the \"Datsun\" name in the American market derives from the name Nissan used for its production cars. In fact, the cars produced by Nissan already used the Datsun brand name, a successful brand in Japan since 1932, long before World War II. Before the entry into the American market in 1958, Nissan did not produce cars under the Nissan brand name, but only trucks. Their in-house-designed cars were always branded as \"Datsuns\". Hence, for Nissan executives it would be only natural to use such a successful name when exporting models to the United States. Only in the 1960s did Datsun begin to brand some automobile models as \"Nissans\", like the Patrol and a small test batch of about 100 Cedric luxury sedans, and then not again until the 1980s. The Japanese market Z-car (sold as the Fairlady Z) also had Nissan badging. In the United States, the Nissan branch was named \"Nissan Motor Corporation in U.S.A.\", and chartered on September 28, 1960, in California, but the small cars the firm exported to America were still named Datsun.\nCorporate choice favored Datsun, so as to distance the parent factory Nissan's association by Americans with Japanese military manufacture. In fact Nissan's involvement in Japan's military industries was substantial. The company's car production at the Yokohama plant shifted towards military needs just a few years after the first passenger cars rolled off the assembly line, on April 11, 1935. By 1939 Nissan's operations had moved to Manchuria, then under Japanese occupation, where its founder and President, Yoshisuke Ayukawa, established the Manchurian Motor Company to manufacture military trucks.\nAyukawa, a well-connected and aggressive risk taker, also made himself a principal partner of the Japanese Colonial Government of Manchukuo. Ultimately, Nissan Heavy Industries emerged near the end of the war as an important player in Japan's war machinery. After the war ended, Soviet Union seized all of Nissan's Manchuria assets, while the Occupation Forces made use of over half of the Yokohama plant. General MacArthur had Ayukawa imprisoned for 21 months as a war criminal. After release he was forbidden from returning to any corporate or public office until 1951. He was never allowed back into Nissan, which returned to passenger car manufacture in 1947 and to its original name of Nissan Motor Company Ltd. in 1949.\nAmerican service personnel in their teens or early twenties during the Second World War would be in prime car-buying age by 1960, if only to find an economical small second car for their growing family needs. Yutaka Katayama (Mr. \"K\"), former president of Nissan's American operations, would have had his personal wartime experiences in mind supporting the name Datsun. Katayama's visit to Nissan's Manchuria truck factory in 1939 made him realise the appalling conditions prevalent on the assembly lines, leading him to abandon the firm. In 1945, near the end of the war, Katayama was ordered to return to the Manchurian plant, however he rebuffed these calls and refused to return.\nKatayama desired to build and sell passenger cars to people, not to the military; for him, the name \"\"Datsun\" had survived the war with its purity intact, not \"Nissan\"\". This obviously led Katayama to have problems with the corporate management. The discouragement felt by Katayama as regards his prospects at Nissan, led to his going on the verge of resigning, when Datsun's 1958 Australian Mobilgas victories vaulted him, as leader of the winning Datsun teams, to national prominence in a Japan bent on regaining international status.\nThe company's first product to be exported around the world was the 113, with a proprietary four-cylinder engine.\nDatsun entered the American market in 1958, with sales in California. By 1959, the company had dealers across the U.S. and began selling the 310 (known as Bluebird domestically). From 1962 to 1969 the Nissan Patrol utility vehicle was sold in the United States (as a competitor to the Toyota Land Cruiser J40 series), making it the only Nissan-badged product sold in the US prior to that name's introduction worldwide decades later.\nFrom 1960 on, exports and production continued to grow. A new plant was built at Oppama, south of Yokohama; it opened in 1962. The next year, Bluebird sales first topped 200,000, and exports touched 100,000. By 1964, Bluebird was being built at 10,000 cars a month.\nFor 1966, Datsun debuted the Sunny/1000, allowing kei car owners to move up to something bigger. That same year, Datsun won the East African Safari Rally and merged with Prince Motors, giving the company the Skyline model range, as well as a test track at Murayama.\nThe company introduced the Bluebird 510 in 1967. This was followed in 1968 with the iconic 240Z, which proved affordable sports cars could be built and sold profitably: it was soon the world's #1-selling sports car. It relied on an engine based on the Bluebird and used Bluebird suspension components. It would go on to two outright wins in the East African Rally.\nKatayama was made Vice President of the Nissan North American subsidiary in 1960, and as long as he was involved in decision making, both as North American Vice President from 1960 to 1965, and then President of Nissan Motor Company U.S.A. from 1965 to 1975, the cars were sold as Datsuns. \"What we need to do is improve our car's efficiency gradually and creep up slowly before others notice. Then, before Detroit realizes it, we will have become an excellent car maker, and the customers will think so too. If we work hard to sell our own cars, we won't be bothered by whatever the other manufacturers do. If all we do is worry about the other cars in the race, we will definitely lose.\"\nDatsun in Europe.\nIn 1935, the first Datsun-badged vehicle was shipped to Britain by car magnate Sir Herbert Austin. The vehicle, a Type 14, was never meant for the road or production, but was a part of a patent dispute as Austin saw a number of similarities to the car with the Austin 7 Ruby. Nissan began exporting Datsun-badged cars to the United Kingdom in 1968, at which time foreign cars were a rarity, with only a small percentage of cars being imported \u2013 some of the most popular examples at the time including the Renault 16 from France and Volkswagen Beetle from West Germany. The first European market that Nissan had entered was Finland, where sales began in 1962. Within a few years, it was importing cars to most of Western Europe.\nDatsun was particularly successful on the British market. It sold just over 6,000 cars there as late as 1971, but its sales surged to more than 30,000 the following year and continued to climb over the next few years, with well-priced products including the Cherry 100A and Sunny 120Y proving particularly popular, at a time when the British motor industry was plagued by strikes and British Leyland in particular was gaining a reputation for building cars which had major issues with build quality and reliability. During the 1970s and early 1980s, Nissan frequently enjoyed the largest market share in Britain of any foreign carmaker.\nBy the early 1980s, the Nissan badge was gradually appearing on Datsun-badged cars, and eventually the Datsun branding was phased out, the final new car with a Datsun badge being the Micra supermini, launched in Britain from June 1983. By the end of 1984, the Datsun branding had completely disappeared in Britain, although it lingered elsewhere until 1986.\nRebranding.\nIn Japan, there appears to have been what probably constituted a long-held 'official' company bias against use of the name \"Datsun\". At the time, Kawamata was a veteran of Nissan, in the last year of his presidency, a powerful figure whose experience in the firm exceeded two decades. His rise to its leadership position occurred in 1957 in part because of his handling of the critical Nissan workers' strike that began May 25, 1953, and ran for 100 days. During his tenure as president, Kawamata stated that he \"regretted that his company did not imprint its corporate name on cars, the way Toyota does. 'Looking back, we wish we had started using Nissan on all of our cars,' he says. 'But Datsun was a pet name for the cars when we started exporting.'\"\nUltimately, the decision was made to stop using the brand name \"Datsun\" worldwide, in order to strengthen the company name \"Nissan\".\n\"The decision to change the name Datsun to Nissan in the U.S. was announced in the autumn (September/October) of 1981. The rationale was that the name change would help the pursuit of a global strategy. A single name worldwide would increase the possibility that advertising campaigns, brochures, and promotional materials could be used across countries and simplify product design and manufacturing. Further, potential buyers would be exposed to the name and product when traveling to other countries. Industry observers, however, speculated that the most important motivation was that a name change would help Nissan market stocks and bonds in the U.S. They also presumed substantial ego involvement, since the absence of the Nissan name in the U.S. surely rankled Nissan executives who had seen Toyota and Honda become household words.\"\nUltimately, the name change campaign lasted for a three-year period from 1982 to 1984 \u2013 Datsun badged vehicles had been progressively fitted with small \"Nissan\" and \"Datsun by Nissan\" badges from the late 1970s onward until the Nissan name was given prominence in 1983 \u2013 although in some export markets, vehicles continued to wear both the Datsun and Nissan badges until 1986. In the United Kingdom for example, the Nissan name initially was used as a prefix to the model name, with Datsun still being used as the manufacturer's name (e.g. Datsun-Nissan Micra) from 1982 until 1984. In the United States, the Nissan name was used for some new vehicles for 1982 such as the Nissan Stanza and the Nissan Sentra while the Datsun name was used on existing vehicles through 1983 including \u2013 confusingly enough \u2013 the Datsun Maxima, which like the Stanza and Sentra was also a new model for 1982, albeit as a renamed Datsun 810. The Maxima and Z continue in production in North America as of 2021, as Nissan's last direct link to its Datsun years.\nThe name change had cost Nissan a figure in the region of US$500 million. Operational costs included the changing of signs at 1,100 Datsun dealerships, and amounted to US$30 million. Another US$200 million were spent during the 1982 to 1986 advertising campaigns, where the \"Datsun, We Are Driven!\" campaign (which was adopted in late 1977 in the wake of the 1973 oil crisis and subsequent 1979 energy crisis) yielded to \"The Name is Nissan\" campaign (the latter campaign was used for some years beyond 1985). Another US$50 million was spent on Datsun advertisements that were paid for but stopped or never used. Five years after the name change program was over, \"Datsun\" still remained more familiar than \"Nissan\".\nDatsun truck.\nIn 2001, Nissan marketed its D22 pick-up model in Japan with the name \"Datsun\". This time however, the use of the brand name was wholly restricted to this one specific model name. Production of this model was between May 2001 and October 2002.\nRelaunch.\nOn 20 March 2012, it was announced that Nissan would revive the Datsun marque as a low-cost car brand for use in Indonesia, Nepal, South Africa, India, and Russia, and on 15 July 2013, nearly three decades after it was phased out, the name was formally resurrected. Nissan said the brand's reputation for value and reliability would help it gain market share in emerging markets.\nThe Datsun brand was relaunched in New Delhi, India, with the Datsun Go, which went on sale in India in early 2014. Datsun models are sold in Indonesia, Russia, India, Nepal and South Africa since 2014. The brand entered Kazakhstan in 2015, and Belarus and Lebanon in 2016.\nThe Datsun Go was being built at the Renault-Nissan plant in Chennai, India. It was also produced in Indonesia. The Go is based on the same Nissan V platform as the Nissan Micra. The Go+, a 5+2 seater station wagon, was added to the range in September 2013.\nIn February 2014, the redi-Go concept car was presented. The redi-Go crossover became available in India mid-2015.\nIn April 2014, the first model for the Russian market, the Datsun on-Do based on Lada Granta, was launched.\nIn November 2019, it was announced that Datsun would stop its production in Indonesia and Russia in 2020.\nIn April 2022, Nissan announced that it is shutting down the production of Datsun cars in India."}
{"id": "8077", "revid": "246213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8077", "title": "Daily rushes", "text": ""}
{"id": "8078", "revid": "140154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8078", "title": "Dynamite", "text": "Dynamite is an explosive made of nitroglycerin, sorbents (such as powdered shells or clay), and stabilizers. It was invented by the Swedish chemist and engineer Alfred Nobel in Geesthacht, Northern Germany, and was patented in 1867. It rapidly gained wide-scale use as a more robust alternative to the traditional black powder explosives. It allows the use of nitroglycerine's favorable explosive properties while greatly reducing its risk of accidental detonation.\nHistory.\nDynamite was invented by Swedish chemist Alfred Nobel in 1866 and was the first safely manageable explosive stronger than black powder.\nAlfred Nobel's father, Immanuel Nobel, was an industrialist, engineer, and inventor. He built bridges and buildings in Stockholm and founded Sweden's first rubber factory. His construction work inspired him to research new methods of blasting rock that were more effective than black powder. After some bad business deals in Sweden, in 1838 Immanuel moved his family to Saint Petersburg, where Alfred and his brothers were educated privately under Swedish and Russian tutors. At the age of 17, Alfred Nobel was sent abroad for two years; in the United States he met Swedish engineer John Ericsson and in France studied under famed chemist Th\u00e9ophile-Jules Pelouze and his pupil Ascanio Sobrero, who had first synthesized nitroglycerin in 1847. Pelouze cautioned Nobel against using nitroglycerine as a commercial explosive because of its great sensitivity to shock.\nIn 1857, Nobel filed the first of several hundred patents, mostly concerning air pressure, gas and fluid gauges, but remained fascinated with nitroglycerin's potential as an explosive. Nobel, along with his father and brother Emil, experimented with various combinations of nitroglycerin and black powder. Nobel came up with a way to safely detonate nitroglycerin by inventing the detonator, or blasting cap, that allowed a controlled explosion set off from a distance using a fuse. In 1863 Nobel performed his first successful detonation of pure nitroglycerin, using a blasting cap made of a copper percussion cap and mercury fulminate. In 1864, Alfred Nobel filed patents for both the blasting cap and his method of synthesizing nitroglycerin, using sulfuric acid, nitric acid and glycerin. On 3 September 1864, while experimenting with nitroglycerin, Emil and several others were killed in an explosion at the factory at Immanuel Nobel's estate at Heleneborg. After this, Alfred founded the company Nitroglycerin Aktiebolaget in Vinterviken to continue work in a more isolated area and the following year moved to Germany, where he founded another company, Dynamit Nobel.\nDespite the invention of the blasting cap, the instability of nitroglycerin rendered it useless as a commercial explosive. To solve this problem, Nobel sought to combine it with another substance that would make it safe for transport and handling but would not reduce its effectiveness as an explosive. He tried combinations of cement, coal, and sawdust, but was unsuccessful. Finally, he tried diatomaceous earth, which is fossilized algae, that he brought from the Elbe River near his factory in Hamburg, which successfully stabilized the nitroglycerin into a portable explosive.\nNobel obtained patents for his inventions in England on 7 May 1867 and in Sweden on 19 October 1867. After its introduction, dynamite rapidly gained wide-scale use as a safe alternative to black powder and nitroglycerin. Nobel tightly controlled the patents, and unlicensed duplicating companies were quickly shut down. A few American businessmen got around the patent by using absorbents other than diatomaceous earth, such as resin.\nNobel originally sold dynamite as \"Nobel's Blasting Powder\" and later changed the name to dynamite, from the Ancient Greek word \"d\u00fdnamis\" (), meaning \"power\".\nManufacture.\nForm.\nDynamite is usually sold in the form of cardboard cylinders about long and about in diameter, with a mass of about . A stick of dynamite thus produced contains roughly 1\u00a0MJ (megajoule) of energy. Other sizes also exist, rated by either portion (Quarter-Stick or Half-Stick) or by weight.\nDynamite is usually rated by \"weight strength\" (the amount of nitroglycerin it contains), usually from 20% to 60%. For example, \"40% dynamite\" is composed of 40% nitroglycerin and 60% \"dope\" (the absorbent storage medium mixed with the stabilizer and any additives).\nStorage considerations.\nThe maximum shelf life of nitroglycerin-based dynamite is recommended as one year from the date of manufacture under good storage conditions.\nOver time, regardless of the sorbent used, sticks of dynamite will \"weep\" or \"sweat\" nitroglycerin, which can then pool in the bottom of the box or storage area. For that reason, explosive manuals recommend the regular up-ending of boxes of dynamite in storage. Crystals will form on the outside of the sticks, causing them to be even more sensitive to shock, friction, and temperature. Therefore, while the risk of an explosion without the use of a blasting cap is minimal for fresh dynamite, old dynamite is dangerous. Modern packaging helps eliminate this by placing the dynamite into sealed plastic bags and using wax-coated cardboard.\nDynamite is moderately sensitive to shock. Shock resistance tests are usually carried out with a drop-hammer: about 100\u00a0mg of explosive is placed on an anvil, upon which a weight of between is dropped from different heights until detonation is achieved. With a hammer of 2\u00a0kg, mercury fulminate detonates with a drop distance of 1 to 2\u00a0cm, nitroglycerin with 4 to 5\u00a0cm, dynamite with 15 to 30\u00a0cm, and ammoniacal explosives with 40 to 50\u00a0cm.\nMajor manufacturers.\nSouth Africa.\nFor several decades beginning in the 1940s, the largest producer of dynamite in the world was the Union of South Africa. There, the De Beers company established a factory in 1902 at Somerset West. The explosives factory was later operated by AECI (African Explosives and Chemical Industries). The demand for the product came mainly from the country's vast gold mines, centered on the Witwatersrand. The factory at Somerset West was in operation in 1903 and by 1907 it was already producing 340,000 cases, each, annually. A rival factory at Modderfontein was producing another 200,000 cases per year.\nThere were two large explosions at the Somerset West plant during the 1960s. Some workers died, but the loss of life was limited by the modular design of the factory and its earth works, and the planting of trees that directed the blasts upward. There were several other explosions at the Modderfontein factory. After 1985, pressure from trade unions forced AECI to phase out the production of dynamite. The factory then went on to produce ammonium nitrate emulsion-based explosives that are safer to manufacture and handle.\nUnited States.\nDynamite was first manufactured in the US by the Giant Powder Company of San Francisco, California, whose founder had obtained the exclusive rights from Nobel in 1867. Giant was eventually acquired by DuPont, which produced dynamite under the Giant name until Giant was dissolved by DuPont in 1905.\nThereafter, DuPont produced dynamite under its own name until 1911\u201312, when its explosives monopoly was broken up by the U.S. Circuit Court in the \"Powder Case\". Two new companies were formed upon the breakup, the Hercules Powder Company and the Atlas Powder Company, which took up the manufacture of dynamite (in different formulations).\nCurrently, only Dyno Nobel manufactures dynamite in the US. The only facility producing it is located in Carthage, Missouri, but the material is purchased from Dyno Nobel by other manufacturers who put their labels on the dynamite and boxes.\nNon-dynamite explosives.\nOther explosives are often referred to or confused with dynamite:\nTNT.\nTrinitrotoluene (TNT) is often assumed to be the same as (or confused for) dynamite largely because of the ubiquity of both explosives during the 20th century. This incorrect connection between TNT and dynamite was enhanced by cartoons such as Bugs Bunny, where animators labeled any kind of bomb (ranging from sticks of dynamite to kegs of black powder) as TNT, because the initialism was shorter and more memorable and did not require literacy to recognize that TNT meant \"bomb\".\nAside from both being high explosives, TNT and dynamite have little in common. TNT is a second-generation castable explosive adopted by the military, while dynamite, in contrast, has never been popular in warfare because it degenerates quickly under severe conditions and can be detonated by either fire or a wayward bullet. The German armed forces adopted TNT as a filling for artillery shells in 1902, some 40 years after the invention of dynamite, which is a first-generation phlegmatized explosive primarily intended for civilian earthmoving. TNT has never been popular or widespread in civilian earthmoving, as it is considerably more expensive and less powerful by weight than dynamite, as well as being slower to mix and pack into boreholes. TNT's primary asset is its remarkable insensitivity and stability: it is waterproof and incapable of detonating without the extreme shock and heat provided by a blasting cap (or a sympathetic detonation); this stability also allows it to be melted at , poured into high explosive shells and allowed to re-solidify, with no extra danger or change in the TNT's characteristics. Accordingly, more than 90% of the TNT produced in the United States was always for the military market, with most TNT used for filling shells, hand grenades and aerial bombs, and the remainder being packaged in brown \"bricks\" (not red cylinders) for use as demolition charges by combat engineers.\n\"Extra\" dynamite.\nIn the United States, in 1885, the chemist Russell S. Penniman invented \"ammonium dynamite\", a form of explosive that used ammonium nitrate as a substitute for the more costly nitroglycerin. Ammonium nitrate has only 85% of the chemical energy of nitroglycerin.\nIt is rated by either \"weight strength\" (the amount of ammonium nitrate in the medium) or \"cartridge strength\" (the potential explosive strength generated by an amount of explosive of a certain density and grain size used in comparison to the explosive strength generated by an equivalent density and grain size of a standard explosive). For example, high-explosive \"65% Extra dynamite\" has a weight strength of 65% ammonium nitrate and 35% \"dope\" (the absorbent medium mixed with the stabilizers and additives). Its \"cartridge strength\" would be its weight in pounds times its strength in relation to an equal amount of ANFO (the civilian baseline standard) or TNT (the military baseline standard). For example, 65% ammonium dynamite with a 20% cartridge strength would mean the stick was equal to an equivalent weight strength of 20% ANFO.\n\"Military dynamite\".\n\"Military dynamite\" (or M1 dynamite) is a dynamite substitute made with more stable ingredients than nitroglycerin. It contains 75% RDX, 15% TNT and 10% desensitizers and plasticizers. It has only 60% equivalent strength as commercial dynamite, but is much safer to store and handle.\nRegulation.\nVarious countries around the world have enacted laws regarding explosives and require licenses to manufacture, distribute, store, use, and possess explosives or ingredients."}
{"id": "8079", "revid": "28422", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8079", "title": "David Fincher", "text": "David Andrew Leo Fincher (born August 28, 1962) is an American film director. His films, of which most are psychological thrillers, have collectively grossed over $2.1\u00a0billion worldwide and have received numerous accolades, including three nominations for the Academy Awards for Best Director. He has also received four Primetime Emmy Awards, two Grammy Awards, a BAFTA Award, and a Golden Globe Award.\nFincher co-founded the production company Propaganda Films in 1986. He directed numerous music videos for the company, including Madonna's \"Express Yourself\" in 1989 and \"Vogue\" in 1990, both of which won him the MTV Video Music Award for Best Direction. He received two Grammy Awards for Best Music Video for \"Love Is Strong\" (1994) by the Rolling Stones and \"Suit &amp; Tie\" (2013) by Justin Timberlake featuring Jay-Z.\nHe made his feature film debut with \"Alien 3\" (1992) and gained his breakthrough with \"Seven\" (1995). He has since directed \"The Game\" (1997), \"Fight Club\" (1999), \"Panic Room\" (2002), \"Zodiac\" (2007), \"The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo\" (2011), \"Gone Girl\" (2014), and \"The Killer\" (2023). He received nominations for the Academy Award for Best Director for the dramas \"The Curious Case of Benjamin Button\" (2008), \"The Social Network\" (2010), and \"Mank\" (2020).\nIn television, Fincher has served as an executive producer and director for the Netflix series \"House of Cards\" (2013\u20132018) and \"Mindhunter\" (2017\u20132019), winning the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for the pilot episode of the former. He also executive produced and co-created the Netflix animated series \"Love, Death &amp; Robots\" (2019\u2013present) which received three Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Short Form Animated Program.\nEarly life.\nDavid Andrew Leo Fincher was born in Denver on August 28, 1962. His mother, Claire Mae (n\u00e9e Boettcher), was a mental health nurse from South Dakota who worked in drug addiction programs. His father, Howard Kelly \"Jack\" Fincher (1930\u20132003), was an author from Oklahoma who worked as a reporter and bureau chief for \"Life\" magazine. When Fincher was two years old, the family moved to San Anselmo, California, where he counted filmmaker George Lucas among his neighbors. He became fascinated with filmmaking at the age of eight and began making films on an 8mm camera. In a 2012 interview, he said:\nAs a teenager, Fincher moved to Ashland, Oregon, where he attended Ashland High School. He directed plays and designed sets and lighting after school, was a non-union projectionist at Varsity Theatre, and worked as a production assistant at the KOBI news station in Medford. He supported himself by working as a busboy, dishwasher, and fry cook.\nCareer.\n1983\u20131991: Early work.\nWhile establishing himself in the film industry, Fincher was employed at John Korty's studio as a production head. Gaining further experience, he became a visual effects producer, working on the animated \"Twice Upon a Time\" (1983) with George Lucas. He was hired by Industrial Light &amp; Magic (ILM) in 1983 as an assistant cameraman and matte photographer and worked on \"Return of the Jedi\" (1983) and \"Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom\" (1984). In 1984, he left ILM to direct a television commercial for the American Cancer Society that depicted a fetus smoking a cigarette.\nThis quickly brought Fincher to the attention of producers in Los Angeles, and he was soon given the opportunity to direct Rick Springfield's 1985 documentary, \"The Beat of the Live Drum\". Set on a directing career, Fincher co-founded production company Propaganda Films and started directing commercials and music videos. Other directors such as Michael Bay, Antoine Fuqua, Michel Gondry, Spike Jonze, Alex Proyas, Paul Rachman, Mark Romanek, Zack Snyder and Gore Verbinski also honed their skills at Propaganda Films before moving on to feature films.\nFincher directed TV commercials for many companies including Levi's, Converse, Nike, Pepsi, Revlon, Sony, Coca-Cola and Chanel, although he loathed doing them. Starting in 1984, Fincher began his foray into music videos. He directed videos for various artists including singer-songwriters Rick Springfield, Don Henley, Martha Davis, Paula Abdul, rock band the Outfield, and R&amp;B singer Jermaine Stewart. Fincher's 1990 music video for \"Freedom! '90\" was one of the most successful for George Michael.\nHe directed Michael Jackson's \"Who Is It\", Aerosmith's \"Janie's Got A Gun\" and Billy Idol's \"Cradle of Love\". For Madonna, he directed the videos for \"Express Yourself\", \"Oh Father\", \"Bad Girl\" and \"Vogue\". The black-and-white video for \"Vogue\" took inspiration from the films of the 1920s and 1930s and has been frequently cited as one of the best videos of all time. Between 1984 and 1993, Fincher was credited as a director for 53 music videos. He referred to the production of music videos as his own \"film school\", in which he learned how to work efficiently within a small budget and time frame.\n1992\u20132000: Breakthrough.\nIn 1990, 20th Century Fox hired Fincher to replace Vincent Ward as the director for the science-fiction horror \"Alien 3\" (1992), his film directorial debut. It was the third installment in the \"Alien\" franchise starring Sigourney Weaver. The film was released in May 1992 to a mixed reception from critics and was considered weaker than the preceding films. From the beginning, \"Alien 3\" was hampered by studio intervention and several abandoned scripts. Peter Travers of the \"Rolling Stone\" called the film \"bold and haunting\", despite the \"struggle of nine writers\" and \"studio interference\".\nThe film received an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects. Years later, Fincher publicly expressed his dismay and subsequently disowned the film. In the book \"Director's Cut: Picturing Hollywood in the 21st Century\", Fincher blames the producers for their lack of trust in him. In an interview with \"The Guardian\" in 2009, he stated, \"No one hated it more than me; to this day, no one hates it more than me.\"\nAfter this critical disappointment, Fincher eschewed reading film scripts or directing another project. He briefly retreated to directing commercials and music videos, including the video for the song \"Love Is Strong\" by the Rolling Stones in 1994, which won the Grammy Award for Best Music Video. Shortly, Fincher decided to make a foray back into film. He read Andrew Kevin Walker's original screenplay for \"Seven\" (1995), which had been revised by Jeremiah Chechik, the director attached to the project at one point. Fincher expressed no interest in directing the revised version, so New Line Cinema agreed to keep the original ending. Starring Brad Pitt, Morgan Freeman, Gwyneth Paltrow, R. Lee Ermey, and Kevin Spacey, it tells the story of two detectives who attempt to identify a serial killer who bases his murders on the Christian seven deadly sins. \"Seven\" was positively received by film critics and was one of the highest-earning films of 1995, grossing more than $320\u00a0million worldwide. Writing for \"Sight and Sound\", John Wrathall said it \"stands as the most complex and disturbing entry in the serial killer genre since \"Manhunter\"\" and Roger Ebert opined that \"Seven\" is \"one of the darkest and most merciless films ever made in the Hollywood mainstream.\"\nFollowing \"Seven\", Fincher directed a music video for \"6th Avenue Heartache\" by the Wallflowers and went on to direct his third feature film, the mystery thriller \"The Game\" (1997), written by the duo John Brancato and Michael Ferris. Fincher also hired \"Seven\" screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker to contribute and polish the script. Filmed on location in San Francisco, the story follows an investment banker, played by Michael Douglas, who receives an unusual gift from his younger brother (Sean Penn), where he becomes involved in a \"game\" that integrates with his everyday life, making him unable to differentiate between game and reality. Almar Haflidason of the BBC was critical of the ending, but praised the visuals\u2014\"Fincher does a marvelous job of turning ordinary city locations into frightening backdrops, where every corner turned is another step into the unknown\". Upon \"The Game\"'s release in September 1997, the film received generally favorable reviews but performed moderately at the box office. \"The Game\" was later included in the Criterion Collection.\nIn August 1997, Fincher agreed to direct \"Fight Club\", based on the 1996 novel of the same name by Chuck Palahniuk. It was his second film with 20th Century Fox after the troubled production of \"Alien 3\". Starring Brad Pitt, Edward Norton and Helena Bonham Carter, the film is about a nameless office worker suffering from insomnia, who meets a salesman, and together form an underground fighting club as a form of therapy. Fox struggled with the marketing of the film, and were concerned that it would have a limited audience. \"Fight Club\" premiered on October 15, 1999, in the United States to a polarized response and modest box office success; the film grossed $100.9 million against a budget of $63 million. Initially, many critics thought the film was \"a violent and dangerous express train of masochism and aggression.\" However, in following years, \"Fight Club\" became a cult favorite and gained acknowledgement for its multilayered themes; the film has been the source of critical analysis from academics and film critics.\n2001\u20132010: Continued success.\nIn 2001, Fincher served as an executive producer for the first season of \"The Hire\", a series of short films to promote BMW automobiles. The films were released on the internet in 2001. Next in 2002, Fincher returned to another feature film, a thriller titled \"Panic Room\". The story follows a single mother and her daughter who hide in a safe room of their new home, during a home invasion by a trio. Starring Jodie Foster (who replaced Nicole Kidman), Forest Whitaker, Kristen Stewart, Dwight Yoakam, and Jared Leto, it was theatrically released on March 29, 2002, after a month delay, to critical acclaim and commercial success.\nIn North America, the film earned $96.4 million. In other countries, it grossed $100 million for a worldwide $196.4 million. Mick LaSalle of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" praised the filmmakers for their \"fair degree of ingenuity... for 88 minutes of excitement\" and the convincing performance given by Foster. Fincher acknowledged \"Panic Room\" for being more mainstream, describing the film, \"It's supposed to be a popcorn movie\u2014there are no great, overriding implications. It's just about survival.\"\nFive years after \"Panic Room\", Fincher returned on March 2, 2007, with \"Zodiac\", a thriller based on Robert Graysmith's books about the search for the Zodiac, a real life serial murderer who terrorized communities between the late 1960s and early 1970s. Fincher first learned of the project after being approached by producer Brad Fischer; he was intrigued by the story due to his childhood personal experience. \"The highway patrol had been following our school buses\", he recalled. His father told him, \"There's a serial killer who has killed four or five people... who's threatened to... shoot the children as they come off the bus.\"\nAfter extensive research on the case with fellow producers, Fincher formed a principal cast of Jake Gyllenhaal, Mark Ruffalo, Robert Downey Jr., Anthony Edwards and Brian Cox. It was the first of Fincher's films to be shot in digital, with a Thomson Viper FilmStream HD camera. However, high-speed film cameras were used for particular murder scenes. \"Zodiac\" was well received, appearing in more than two hundred top ten lists (only \"No Country for Old Men\" and \"There Will Be Blood\" appeared in more). However, the film struggled at the United States box office, earning $33\u00a0million, but did better overseas with a gross of $51.7\u00a0million. Worldwide, \"Zodiac\" was a moderate success. Despite a campaign by Paramount Pictures, the film did not receive any Academy Award or Golden Globe nominations.\nIn 2008, Fincher was attached to a film adaptation of the science-fiction novel, \"Rendezvous with Rama\" by Arthur C. Clarke, however, Fincher said the film is unlikely to go ahead due to problems with the script. His next project was \"The Curious Case of Benjamin Button\" (2008), an adaptation of F. Scott Fitzgerald's eponymous 1923 short story, about a man who is born as a seventy-year-old baby and ages in reverse. The romantic-drama marked Fincher's third collaboration with Brad Pitt, who stars opposite Cate Blanchett. The budget for the film was estimated to be $167\u00a0million, with very expensive visual effects utilized for Pitt's character.\nFilming started in November 2006 in New Orleans, taking advantage of Louisiana's film incentive. The film was theatrically released on December 25, 2008, in the United States to a commercial success and warm reception. Writing for the \"USA Today\", Claudia Puig praises the \"graceful and poignant\" tale despite it being \"overlong and not as emotionally involving as it could be\". The film received thirteen Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture, Best Director for Fincher, Best Actor for Pitt, and Best Supporting Actress for Taraji P. Henson, and won three, for Best Art Direction, Best Makeup, and Best Visual Effects.\nFincher directed the 2010 film \"The Social Network\", a biographical drama about Facebook founder, Mark Zuckerberg and his legal battles. The screenplay was written by Aaron Sorkin, who adapted it from the book \"The Accidental Billionaires\". It stars Jesse Eisenberg as Zuckerberg, with a supporting cast of Andrew Garfield, Justin Timberlake, Armie Hammer and Max Minghella. Principal photography started in October 2009 in Cambridge, Massachusetts and the film was released one year later. \"The Social Network\" was also a commercial success, earning $224.9 million worldwide. At the 83rd Academy Awards, the film received eight nominations and won three awards; soundtrack composers Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross won for Best Original Score, and the other two awards were for Best Adapted Screenplay and Best Film Editing. The film received awards for Best Motion Picture \u2013 Drama, Best Director, Best Screenplay, and Best Original Score at the 68th Golden Globe Awards. Critics including Roger Ebert, complimented the writing, describing the film as having \"spellbinding dialogue. It makes an untellable story clear and fascinating\".\n2011\u2013present: Established filmmaker and work with Netflix.\nIn 2011, Fincher followed the success of \"The Social Network\" with \"The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo\", a psychological thriller based on the novel by Swedish writer Stieg Larsson. Screenwriter Steven Zaillian spent three months analyzing the novel, writing notes and deleting elements to achieve a suitable running time. Featuring Daniel Craig as journalist Mikael Blomkvist and Rooney Mara as Lisbeth Salander, it follows Blomkvist's investigation to solve what happened to a woman from a wealthy family who disappeared four decades ago. To maintain the novel's setting, the film was primarily shot in Sweden.\nThe soundtrack, composed by collaborators Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross, was described by A. O. Scott of \"The New York Times\" as, \"unnerving and powerful\". Upon the film's release in December, reviews were generally favorable, according to review aggregator Metacritic. Scott adds, \"Mr. Fincher creates a persuasive ambience of political menace and moral despair\". Philip French of \"The Guardian\" praises the \"authentic, quirky detail\" and faithful adaptation. The film received five Academy Award nominations, including Best Actress for Mara, and won the award for Best Film Editing. In 2012, Fincher signed a first look deal with Regency Enterprises.\nIn 2013, Fincher served as an executive producer for the Netflix television series \"House of Cards\", a political thriller about a Congressman's quest for revenge, of which he also directed the first two episodes. The series received positive reviews, earning nine Primetime Emmy nominations, including Outstanding Drama Series. Fincher won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for the first episode. He also directed a music video for the first time since 2005, \"Suit &amp; Tie\" by Justin Timberlake and Jay-Z, which won a Grammy Award for Best Music Video.\nIn 2014, Fincher signed a deal with HBO for three television series - \"Utopia\" (an adaptation of the British series, to be written by Gillian Flynn), \"Shakedown\", and \"Videosyncrazy\". In August 2015, budget disputes between him and the network halted production. Three years later, in 2018, \"Utopia\" was picked up by Amazon Studios, with Gillian Flynn as creator.\nFincher directed \"Gone Girl\" (2014), an adaptation of Gillian Flynn's novel of the same name, starring Ben Affleck and Rosamund Pike. He even met with Flynn to discuss his interest in the project before a director was selected. Set in Missouri, the story begins as a mystery that follows the events surrounding Nick Dunne (Affleck), who becomes the prime suspect in the sudden disappearance of his wife Amy (Pike). A critical and commercial success, the film earned $369 million worldwide against a $61 million budget, making it Fincher's highest-grossing work to date. Writing for \"Salon\" magazine, Andrew O'Hehir praises the \"tremendous ensemble cast who mesh marvelously\", adding, \"All the technical command of image, sound and production design for which Fincher is justly famous is here as well.\" \"Gone Girl\" garnered awards and nominations in a various categories; Pike earned an Academy Award nomination for Best Actress and Fincher received his third Golden Globe nomination for Best Director.Between 2016 and 2019, Fincher directed, produced and served as showrunner for another series, \"Mindhunter\", starring Holt McCallany and Jonathan Groff. The series, based on the book \"Mind Hunter: Inside the FBI's Elite Serial Crime Unit\", debuted on Netflix worldwide on October 13, 2017. He has expressed interest in eventually making a third season of \"Mindhunter\", which was put on indefinite hold in 2020. In 2023, Fincher confirmed that Netflix will not be making a third season of \"Mindhunter\", saying \"I'm very proud of the first two seasons. But it's a very expensive show and, in the eyes of Netflix, we didn't attract enough of an audience to justify such an investment [for Season 3].\"\nIn June 2017, Jim Gianopulos of Paramount Pictures announced that a sequel to \"World War Z\" was \"in advanced development\" with Fincher and Brad Pitt. Producers Dede Gardner and Jeremy Kleiner said that Fincher would begin directing it in June 2019. However, in February 2019, Paramount cancelled the project. As of 2019, Fincher serves as an executive producer for \"Love, Death &amp; Robots\", an animated science-fiction web series for Netflix.\nIn July 2019, Fincher signed on to direct \"Mank\", a biopic about \"Citizen Kane\" screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz. \"Mank\" received a limited theatrical release on November 13, 2020, and was made available on Netflix on December 4. Gary Oldman portrayed Mankiewicz, and the film received ten Academy Award nominations, winning two for Best Cinematography and Best Production Design.\nFincher served as an executive producer on a series titled \"Voir\" (2021) for Netflix. In 2022, Fincher made his first foray in animation directing an episode for the third season of \"Love, Death &amp; Robots\". The episode is titled \"Bad Travelling\" and was written by \"Seven\" screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker. In February 2021, it was reported that Fincher would direct an adaptation of the graphic novel \"The Killer\" for Netflix, with Andrew Kevin Walker writing the screenplay and Michael Fassbender attached to star. It premiered at the 80th Venice International Film Festival. It began a limited theatrical release in October 2023 and was subsequently released on Netflix on 10 November.\nIn 2024, it was reported that Fincher was interested in working on an American adaptation of the popular Korean series \"Squid Game\" and was developing it alongside a \"Chinatown\" prequel miniseries that he co-wrote with the late Robert Towne. It was confirmed in October 2024 that he would develop and work on the \"Squid Game\" adaptation for 2025.\nFilmmaking style and techniques.\nInfluences.\nFincher did not attend film school. He has listed filmmakers George Roy Hill, Alfred Hitchcock, Stanley Kubrick, Alan J. Pakula, Ridley Scott, and Martin Scorsese as his major influences. His personal favorite films include \"Rear Window\" (1954), \"Lawrence of Arabia\" (1962), \"The Graduate\" (1967), \"Paper Moon\" (1973), \"American Graffiti\" (1973), \"Jaws\" (1975), \"All the President's Men\" (1976), \"Taxi Driver\" (1976), \"Close Encounters of the Third Kind\" (1977), and \"Zelig\" (1983). He suggested that his film \"Panic Room\" is a combination of \"Rear Window\" and \"Straw Dogs\" (1971).\nFor \"Seven\", Fincher and cinematographer Darius Khondji were inspired by films \"The French Connection\" (1971) and \"Klute\" (1971), as well as the work of photographer Robert Frank. He has cited graphic designer Saul Bass as an inspiration for his films' title sequences; Bass designed many such sequences for prominent directors, including Hitchcock and Kubrick.\nMethod.\nFincher's filmmaking process always begins with extensive research and preparation, although he has said the process is different every time: \"I enjoy reading a script that you can see in your head, and then I enjoy the casting and I enjoy the rehearsal, and I enjoy all the meetings about what it should be, what it could be, what it might be.\" He has admitted to having autocratic tendencies and prefers to micromanage every aspect of a film's production. Icelandic film producer Sigurj\u00f3n Sighvatsson, with whom Fincher has collaborated for decades, has said that \"[Fincher] was always a rebel... always challenging the status quo\".\nKnown for his perfectionism and meticulous eye for detail, Fincher performs thorough research when casting actors to ensure their suitability for the part. His colleague Max Daly said, \"He's really good at finding the one detail that was missed. He knows more than anybody.\" Producer Laura Ziskin said of him, \"He's just scary smart, sort of smarter than everyone else in the room.\" He approaches editing like \"intricate mathematical problems\". Long-time collaborator Angus Wall said that editing \"Zodiac\" was like \"putting together a Swiss watch... all the pieces are so beautifully machined\". He elaborated, \"[Fincher] is incredibly specific. He never settles. And there's a purity that shows in his work.\"\nWhen working with actors, Fincher is known to demand a grueling series of takes to capture a scene perfectly. For instance, the \"Zodiac\" cast members were required to do upwards of 70 takes for certain scenes, much to the displeasure of Jake Gyllenhaal. Rooney Mara had to endure 99 takes for a scene in \"The Social Network\" and said that Fincher enjoys challenging people. \"Gone Girl\" averaged 50 takes per scene. In one of the episodes for \"Mindhunter\", it was reported that a nine-minute scene took 11 hours to shoot. When asked about this method, Fincher said, \"I hate earnestness in performance... usually by take 17 the earnestness is gone.\" He added that he wants a scene to be as natural and authentic as possible. Some actors appreciate this approach, arguing that the subtle adjustments have a big difference in the way a scene is carried. Others have been critical, with R. Lee Ermey stating, \"[Fincher] wants puppets. He doesn't want actors that are creative.\"\nFincher prefers shooting with Red digital cameras, under natural or pre-existing light conditions rather than using elaborate lighting setups. Fincher is known to use computer-generated imagery, which is mostly unnoticeable to the viewer. He does not normally use hand-held cameras during filming, instead preferring cameras on a tripod. He said, \"Handheld has a powerful psychological stranglehold. It means something specific and I don't want to cloud what's going on with too much meaning.\" He has experimented with the disembodied camera movement, notably in \"Panic Room\", where the camera glides around the house to give the impression of surveillance by an unseen observer.\nStyle and themes.\nOne element of Fincher's visual style is the specific way in which he uses tilt, pan, and track in the camera movements. When a character is in motion or expressing emotions, the camera moves at the exact same speed and direction as their body. The movements are choreographed precisely between the actors and camera operators. The resulting effect helps the audience connect with the character to understand their feelings. Similarly, in his music videos, Fincher appreciated that the visuals should enhance the listening experience. He would cut around the vocals, and let the choreography finish before cutting the shot. Camera movements are synchronized to the beat of the music.\nSome regard Fincher as an auteur filmmaker, although he dislikes being associated with that term. Much of his work is influenced by classical film noir and neo noir genres. Fincher's visual style also includes using monochromatic and desaturated colors of blue, green, and yellow, representing the world that the characters are in. In \"The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo\", Fincher uses heavy desaturation for certain scenes, and increases or decreases the effect based on the story or characters' emotions. Erik Messerschmidt, cinematographer for \"Mindhunter\", explained the color palette: \"The show has a desaturated green-yellow look... [it] helps give the show its period feel.\" He states the effect is achieved through production design, costumes, and filming locations\u2014not necessarily through lighting used on set. Fincher also favors detailed and pronounced shadows, as well as using minimal light. When asked about his use of dim lighting, he said bright lights make the color of skin appear unnatural, and that the lights and colors in his films represent \"the way the world looks to [him]\".\nFincher has explored themes of martyrdom, alienation, and dehumanization of modern culture. In addition to the wider themes of good and evil, his characters are usually troubled, discontented, and flawed; they are often unable to socialize and suffer from loneliness. In \"Seven\", \"Zodiac\", and \"The Social Network\", themes of pressure and obsession are explored, leading to the character's downfall. Quoting historian Frank Krutnik, the writer Piers McCarthy argues that \"the protagonists of these films are not totally in control of their actions but are subject to darker, inner impulses\".\nIn a 2017 interview, Fincher explained his fascination of sinister themes: \"There was always a house in any neighborhood that I ever lived in that all the kids on the street wondered, 'What are those people up to?' We sort of attach the sinister to the mundane in order to make things interesting... I think it's also because in order for something to be evil, it almost has to cloak itself as something else.\" Fincher once stated, \"I think people are perverts. I've maintained that. That's the foundation of my career.\"\nCollaborators.\nOver the course of his career, Fincher has shown loyalty to many members of his cast and crew. As a music video director, he collaborated with Paula Abdul five times, as well as Madonna and Rick Springfield four times each. Once he made the transition to feature films, he cast Brad Pitt in three of them. He said of Pitt, \"On-screen and off-screen, Brad's the ultimate guy... he has such a great ease with who he is.\" Bob Stephenson, Michael Massee, Christopher John Fields, John Getz, Elias Koteas, Zach Grenier, Charles Dance, Rooney Mara, Jared Leto, Arliss Howard, and Richmond Arquette have also appeared in at least two of his films.\n\"Fight Club\" was scored by the Dust Brothers, who at that point had never scored a film. Describing their working relationship with Fincher, they said he \"was not hanging over our shoulders telling us what to do\" and that the only direction he gave was to make the music sound as great as the score from \"The Graduate\" (1967). Nine Inch Nails members Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross composed the music for \"The Social Network\", \"The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo\", \"Gone Girl\", \"Mank\", and \"The Killer\". The musicians describe their working relationship as \"collaborative, respectful, and inspiring\" although quipped that it \"hasn't gotten any easier\". Many years before the duo worked with Fincher, he arranged for a remix of the Nine Inch Nails song \"Closer\" to play over the opening credits of \"Seven\". Howard Shore composed the scores for \"Seven\", \"The Game\", and \"Panic Room\".\nDarius Khondji and Jeff Cronenweth have served as cinematographers for Fincher's films. Khondji said, \"Fincher deserves a lot of credit. It was his influence that pushed me to experiment and got me as far as I did.\" Fincher has hired sound designer Ren Klyce in all his films since 1995 and trusts him \"implicitly\". He has worked with film editor Angus Wall since 1988. Wall has worked on seven of his films, five of which as editor.\nDonald Graham Burt has served as a production designer for six films and Bob Wagner has served as an assistant director for six. Casting director Laray Mayfield has worked with Fincher for over 20 years. In a 2010 interview, Fincher said, \"You don't have to love all of your co-collaborators, but you do have to respect them. And when you do, when you realize that people bring stuff to the table that's not necessarily your experience, but if you allow yourself to relate to it, it can enrich the buffet that you're going to bring with you into the editing room.\"\nPersonal life.\nFincher married model Donya Fiorentino (sister of actress Linda Fiorentino). They had one daughter together, before divorcing in 1995. Fincher married producer Ce\u00e1n Chaffin in 1996.\nAwards and recognitions.\nTim Walker of \"The Independent\" praised Fincher's work, stating \"His portrayals of the modern psyche have a power and precision that few film-makers can match.\" In 2003, Fincher was ranked 39th in \"The Guardian\"'s 40 best directors. In 2012, \"The Guardian\" listed him again in their ranking of 23 best film directors in the world, applauding \"his ability to sustain tone and tension\". In 2016\", Zodiac\" and \"The Social Network\" appeared in the BBC's 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century list. In addition to films, Fincher has often been admired for producing some of the most creative music videos.\nFincher received three Academy Award for Best Director nominations for \"The Curious Case of Benjamin Button\" (2008), \"The Social Network\" (2010), and \"Mank\" (2020). He won both the BAFTA Award for Best Direction and the Golden Globe Award for Best Director for \"The Social Network\". He also received two Grammy Awards for \"Love Is Strong\" (1995) by \"The Rolling Stones\" and \"Suit &amp; Tie\" (2013) by Justin Timberlake and Jay-Z as well as four Primetime Emmy Awards for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for \"House of Cards\" (2013) and three Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Short Form Animated Program for \"Love, Death &amp; Robots\"."}
{"id": "8080", "revid": "1272561261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8080", "title": "List of decades, centuries, and millennia", "text": "The list below includes links to articles with further details for each decade, century, and millennium from 15,000BC to AD3000."}
{"id": "8081", "revid": "2790592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8081", "title": "Douglas Engelbart", "text": "Douglas Carl Engelbart (January 30, 1925\u00a0\u2013 July 2, 2013) was an American engineer, inventor, and a pioneer in many aspects of computer science. He is best known for his work on founding the field of human\u2013computer interaction, particularly while at his Augmentation Research Center Lab in SRI International, which resulted in creation of the computer mouse, and the development of hypertext, networked computers, and precursors to graphical user interfaces. These were demonstrated at The Mother of All Demos in 1968. Engelbart's law, the observation that the intrinsic rate of human performance is exponential, is named after him.\nNLS, the \"oN-Line System\", developed by the Augmentation Research Center under Engelbart's guidance with funding primarily from ARPA (as DARPA was then known), demonstrated numerous technologies, most of which are now in widespread use; it included the computer mouse, bitmapped screens, word processing, and hypertext; all of which were displayed at \"The Mother of All Demos\" in 1968. The lab was transferred from SRI to Tymshare in the late 1970s, which was acquired by McDonnell Douglas in 1984, and NLS was renamed Augment (now the Doug Engelbart Institute). At both Tymshare and McDonnell Douglas, Engelbart was limited by a lack of interest in his ideas and funding to pursue them and retired in 1986.\nIn 1988, Engelbart and his daughter Christina launched the Bootstrap Institute \u2013 later known as The Doug Engelbart Institute \u2013 to promote his vision, especially at Stanford University; this effort did result in some DARPA funding to modernize the user interface of Augment. In December 2000, United States President Bill Clinton awarded Engelbart the National Medal of Technology, the U.S.'s highest technology award. In December 2008, Engelbart was honored by SRI at the 40th anniversary of the \"Mother of All Demos\".\nEarly life and education.\nEngelbart was born in Portland, Oregon, on January 30, 1925, to Carl Louis Engelbart and Gladys Charlotte Amelia Munson Engelbart. His ancestors were of German, Swedish and Norwegian descent.\nHe was the middle of three children, with a sister Dorianne (three years older), and a brother David (14 months younger). The family lived in Portland, Oregon, in his early years, and moved to the surrounding countryside along Johnson Creek when he was 8. His father died one year later. He graduated from Portland's Franklin High School in 1942.\nMidway through his undergraduate years at Oregon State University, he served two years in the United States Navy as a radio and radar technician in the Philippines. It was there, on the remote island of Leyte in a small traditional hut on stilts, that he read Vannevar Bush's article \"As We May Think\", which would have a large influence on his thinking and work. He returned to Oregon State and completed his bachelor's degree in electrical engineering in 1948. While at Oregon State, he was a member of Sigma Phi Epsilon social fraternity. He was hired by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics at the Ames Research Center, where he worked in wind tunnel maintenance. In his off hours he enjoyed hiking, camping, and folk dancing. It was there he met Ballard Fish (August 18, 1928 \u2013 June 18, 1997), who was just completing her training to become an occupational therapist. They were married in Portola State Park on May 5, 1951. Soon after, Engelbart left Ames to pursue graduate studies at the University of California, Berkeley. At Berkeley, he studied electrical engineering with a specialty in computers, earning his MS in 1953 and his PhD in 1955.\nCareer and accomplishments.\nGuiding philosophy.\nEngelbart's career was inspired in December 1950 when he was engaged to be married and realized he had no career goals other than \"a steady job, getting married and living happily ever after\". Over several months he reasoned that:\nIn 1945, Engelbart had read with interest Vannevar Bush's article \"As We May Think\", a call to action for making knowledge widely available as a national peacetime grand challenge. He had also read something about the recent phenomenon of computers, and from his experience as a radar technician, he knew that information could be analyzed and displayed on a screen. He envisioned intellectual workers sitting at display \"working stations\", flying through information space, harnessing their collective intellectual capacity to solve important problems together in much more powerful ways. Harnessing collective intellect, facilitated by interactive computers, became his life's mission at a time when computers were viewed as number crunching tools.\nAs a graduate student at Berkeley, he assisted in the construction of CALDIC. His graduate work led to eight patents. After completing his doctorate, Engelbart stayed on at Berkeley as an assistant professor for a year before departing when it became clear that he could not pursue his vision there. Engelbart then formed a startup company, Digital Techniques, to commercialize some of his doctoral research on storage devices, but after a year decided instead to pursue the research he had been dreaming of since 1951.\nSRI and the Augmentation Research Center.\nEngelbart took a position at SRI International (known then as Stanford Research Institute) in Menlo Park, California in 1957. He worked for Hewitt Crane on magnetic devices and miniaturization of electronics; Engelbart and Crane became close friends. At SRI, Engelbart soon obtained a dozen patents, and by 1962 produced a report about his vision and proposed research agenda titled \"Augmenting Human Intellect: A Conceptual Framework\". The research was funded by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, where Rowena Swanson took an active interest in Engelbart's work. Among other highlights, this paper introduced \"Building Information Modelling\", which architectural and engineering practice eventually adopted (first as \"parametric design\") in the 1990s and after.\nThis led to funding from ARPA to launch his work. Engelbart recruited a research team in his new Augmentation Research Center (ARC, the lab he founded at SRI). Engelbart embedded a set of organizing principles in his lab, which he termed \"bootstrapping strategy\". He designed the strategy to accelerate the rate of innovation of his lab.\nThe ARC became the driving force behind the design and development of the oN-Line System (NLS). He and his team developed computer interface elements such as bitmapped screens, the mouse, hypertext, collaborative tools, and precursors to the graphical user interface. He conceived and developed many of his user interface ideas in the mid-1960s, long before the personal computer revolution, at a time when most computers were inaccessible to individuals who could only use computers through intermediaries (see batch processing), and when software tended to be written for vertical applications in proprietary systems.\nEngelbart applied for a patent in 1967 and received it in 1970, for the wooden shell with two metal wheels (computer mouse \u2013 ), which he had developed with Bill English, his lead engineer, sometime before 1965. In the patent application it is described as an \"X-Y position indicator for a display system\". Engelbart later revealed that it was nicknamed the \"mouse\" because the tail came out the end. His group also called the on-screen cursor a \"bug\", but this term was not widely adopted. Engelbart's original cursor was displayed as an arrow pointing upward, but was slanted to the left upon its deployment in the XEROX PARC machine to better distinguish between on-screen text and the cursor in the machine's low-resolution interface. The now-familiar cursor arrow is characterized by a vertical left side and a 45-degree angle on the right.\nHe never received any royalties for the invention of the mouse. During an interview, he said, \"SRI patented the mouse, but they really had no idea of its value. Some years later it was learned that they had licensed it to Apple Computer for something like $40,000.\" Engelbart showcased the chorded keyboard and many more of his and ARC's inventions in 1968 at The Mother of All Demos.\nTymshare and McDonnell Douglas.\nEngelbart slipped into relative obscurity by the mid-1970s. As early as 1970, several of his researchers became alienated from him and left his organization for Xerox PARC, in part due to frustration, and in part due to differing views of the future of computing. Engelbart saw the future in collaborative, networked, timeshare (client-server) computers, which younger programmers rejected in favor of personal computers. The conflict was both technical and ideological: the younger programmers came from an era where centralized power was highly suspect, and personal computing was just barely on the horizon.\nBeginning in 1972, several key ARC personnel were involved in Erhard Seminars Training (EST), with Engelbart ultimately serving on the corporation's board of directors for many years. Although EST had been recommended by other researchers, the controversial nature of EST and other social experiments reduced the morale and social cohesion of the ARC community. The 1969 Mansfield Amendment, which ended military funding of non-military research, the end of the Vietnam War, and the end of the Apollo program gradually reduced ARC's funding from ARPA and NASA throughout the early 1970s.\nSRI's management, which disapproved of Engelbart's approach to running the center, placed the remains of ARC under the control of artificial intelligence researcher Bertram Raphael, who negotiated the transfer of the laboratory to Tymshare in 1976. Engelbart's house in Atherton, California burned down during this period, causing him and his family further problems. Tymshare took over NLS and the lab that Engelbart had founded, hired most of the lab's staff (including its creator as a Senior Scientist), renamed the software \"Augment\", and offered it as a commercial service via its new Office Automation Division. Tymshare was already somewhat familiar with NLS; when ARC was still operational, it had experimented with its own local copy of the NLS software on a minicomputer called OFFICE-1, as part of a joint project with ARC.\nAt Tymshare, Engelbart soon found himself further marginalized. Operational concerns at Tymshare overrode Engelbart's desire to conduct ongoing research. Various executives, first at Tymshare and later at McDonnell Douglas, which acquired Tymshare in 1984, expressed interest in his ideas, but never committed the funds or the people to further develop them. His interest inside of McDonnell Douglas was focused on the enormous knowledge management and IT requirements involved in the life cycle of an aerospace program, which served to strengthen Engelbart's resolve to motivate the information technology arena toward global interoperability and an open hyperdocument system. Engelbart retired from McDonnell Douglas in 1986, determined to pursue his work free from commercial pressure.\nBootstrap and the Doug Engelbart Institute.\nTeaming with his daughter, Christina Engelbart, he founded the Bootstrap Institute in 1988 to coalesce his ideas into a series of three-day and half-day management seminars offered at Stanford University from 1989 to 2000. By the early 1990s there was sufficient interest among his seminar graduates to launch a collaborative implementation of his work, and the Bootstrap Alliance was formed as a non-profit home base for this effort. Although the invasion of Iraq and subsequent recession spawned a rash of belt-tightening reorganizations which drastically redirected the efforts of their alliance partners, they continued with the management seminars, consulting, and small-scale collaborations. In the mid-1990s they were awarded some DARPA funding to develop a modern user interface to Augment, called Visual AugTerm (VAT), while participating in a larger program addressing the IT requirements of the Joint Task Force.\nEngelbart was Founder Emeritus of the Doug Engelbart Institute, which he founded in 1988 with his daughter Christina Engelbart, who is executive director. The Institute promotes Engelbart's philosophy for boosting Collective IQ\u2014the concept of dramatically improving how we can solve important problems together\u2014using a strategic \"bootstrapping\" approach for accelerating our progress toward that goal. In 2005, Engelbart received a National Science Foundation grant to fund the open source HyperScope project. The Hyperscope team built a browser component using Ajax and Dynamic HTML designed to replicate Augment's multiple viewing and jumping capabilities (linking within and across various documents).\nLater years and death.\nEngelbart attended the Program for the Future 2010 Conference where hundreds of people convened at The Tech Museum in San Jose and online to engage in dialog about how to pursue his vision to augment collective intelligence.\nThe most complete coverage of Engelbart's bootstrapping ideas can be found in \"Boosting Our Collective IQ\", by Douglas C. Engelbart, 1995. This includes three of Engelbart's key papers, edited into book form by Yuri Rubinsky and Christina Engelbart to commemorate the presentation of the 1995 SoftQuad Web Award to Doug Engelbart at the World Wide Web conference in Boston in December 1995. Only 2,000 softcover copies were printed, and 100 hardcover, numbered and signed by Engelbart and Tim Berners-Lee. Engelbart's book is now being republished by the Doug Engelbart Institute.\nTwo comprehensive histories of Engelbart's laboratory and work are in \"What the Dormouse Said: How the Sixties Counterculture Shaped the Personal Computer Industry\" by John Markoff and \"A Heritage of Innovation: SRI's First Half Century\" by Donald Neilson. Other books on Engelbart and his laboratory include \"Bootstrapping: Douglas Engelbart, Coevolution, and the Origins of Personal Computing\" by Thierry Bardini and \"The Engelbart Hypothesis: Dialogs with Douglas Engelbart\", by Valerie Landau and Eileen Clegg in conversation with Douglas Engelbart. All four of these books are based on interviews with Engelbart as well as other contributors in his laboratory.\nEngelbart served on the Advisory Boards of the University of Santa Clara Center for Science, Technology, and Society, Foresight Institute, Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, The Technology Center of Silicon Valley, and The Liquid Information Company.\nEngelbart had four children, Gerda, Diana, Christina and Norman with his first wife Ballard, who died in 1997 after 47 years of marriage. He remarried on January 26, 2008, to writer and producer Karen O'Leary Engelbart. An 85th birthday celebration was held at the Tech Museum of Innovation.\nEngelbart died at his home in Atherton, California, on July 2, 2013, due to kidney failure. A close friend and fellow computer scientist, Ted Nelson, gave a speech paying tribute to Engelbart. According to the Doug Engelbart Institute, his death came after a long battle with Alzheimer's disease, which he was diagnosed with in 2007. Engelbart was 88 and was survived by his second wife, the four children from his first marriage, and nine grandchildren.\nAnecdotal notes.\nHistorian of science Thierry Bardini argues that Engelbart's complex personal philosophy (which drove all his research) foreshadowed the modern application of the concept of coevolution to the philosophy and use of technology. Bardini points out that Engelbart was strongly influenced by the principle of linguistic relativity developed by Benjamin Lee Whorf. Where Whorf reasoned that the sophistication of a language controls the sophistication of the thoughts that can be expressed by a speaker of that language, Engelbart reasoned that the state of our current technology controls our ability to manipulate information, and that fact in turn will control our ability to develop new, improved technologies. He thus set himself to the revolutionary task of developing computer-based technologies for manipulating information directly, and also to improve individual and group processes for knowledge-work.\nAwards and honors.\nSince the late 1980s, prominent individuals and organizations have recognized the seminal importance of Engelbart's contributions. In December 1995, at the Fourth WWW Conference in Boston, he was the first recipient of what would later become the Yuri Rubinsky Memorial Award. In 1997, he was awarded the Lemelson-MIT Prize of $500,000, the world's largest single prize for invention and innovation, and the ACM Turing Award. To mark the 30th anniversary of Engelbart's 1968 demo, in 1998 the Stanford Silicon Valley Archives and the Institute for the Future hosted \"Engelbart's Unfinished Revolution\", a symposium at Stanford University's Memorial Auditorium, to honor Engelbart and his ideas. He was inducted into National Inventors Hall of Fame in 1998.\nEngelbart was awarded the Stibitz-Wilson Award from the American Computer &amp; Robotics Museum in 1998.\nAlso in 1998, Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) SIGCHI awarded Engelbart the CHI Lifetime Achievement Award. ACM SIGCHI later inducted Engelbart into the CHI Academy in 2002. Engelbart was awarded The Franklin Institute's Certificate of Merit in 1996 and the Benjamin Franklin Medal in 1999 in Computer and Cognitive Science. In early 2000 Engelbart produced, with volunteers and sponsors, what was called \"The Unfinished Revolution\u00a0\u2013 II\", also known as the \"Engelbart Colloquium\" at Stanford University, to document and publicize his work and ideas to a larger audience (live, and online).\nIn December 2000, U.S. President Bill Clinton awarded Engelbart the National Medal of Technology, the country's highest technology award. In 2001 he was awarded the British Computer Society's Lovelace Medal. In 2005, he was made a Fellow of the Computer History Museum \"for advancing the study of human\u2013computer interaction, developing the mouse input device, and for the application of computers to improving organizational efficiency.\" He was honored with the Norbert Wiener Award, which is given annually by Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility. Robert X. Cringely did an hour-long interview with Engelbart on December 9, 2005, in his NerdTV video podcast series.\nOn December 9, 2008, Engelbart was honored at the 40th Anniversary celebration of the 1968 \"Mother of All Demos\". The event was produced by SRI International and held at Memorial Auditorium at Stanford University. Speakers included several members of Engelbart's original Augmentation Research Center (ARC) team including Don Andrews, Bill Paxton, Bill English, and Jeff Rulifson, Engelbart's chief government sponsor Bob Taylor, and other pioneers of interactive computing, including Andy van Dam and Alan Kay. In addition, Christina Engelbart spoke about her father's early influences and the ongoing work of the Doug Engelbart Institute.\nIn June 2009, the New Media Consortium recognized Engelbart as an NMC Fellow for his lifetime of achievements. In 2011, Engelbart was inducted into IEEE Intelligent Systems' AI's Hall of Fame. Engelbart received the first honorary Doctor of Engineering and Technology degree from Yale University in May 2011."}
{"id": "8082", "revid": "31711978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8082", "title": "Diamond", "text": "Diamond is a solid form of the element carbon with its atoms arranged in a crystal structure called diamond cubic. Diamond as a form of carbon is tasteless, odourless, strong, brittle solid, colourless in pure form, a poor conductor of electricity, and insoluble in water. Another solid form of carbon known as graphite is the chemically stable form of carbon at room temperature and pressure, but diamond is metastable and converts to it at a negligible rate under those conditions. Diamond has the highest hardness and thermal conductivity of any natural material, properties that are used in major industrial applications such as cutting and polishing tools. They are also the reason that diamond anvil cells can subject materials to pressures found deep in the Earth.\nBecause the arrangement of atoms in diamond is extremely rigid, few types of impurity can contaminate it (two exceptions are boron and nitrogen). Small numbers of defects or impurities (about one per million of lattice atoms) can color a diamond blue (boron), yellow (nitrogen), brown (defects), green (radiation exposure), purple, pink, orange, or red. Diamond also has a very high refractive index and a relatively high optical dispersion.\nMost natural diamonds have ages between 1\u00a0billion and 3.5\u00a0billion years. Most were formed at depths between in the Earth's mantle, although a few have come from as deep as . Under high pressure and temperature, carbon-containing fluids dissolved various minerals and replaced them with diamonds. Much more recently (hundreds to tens of million years ago), they were carried to the surface in volcanic eruptions and deposited in igneous rocks known as kimberlites and lamproites.\nSynthetic diamonds can be grown from high-purity carbon under high pressures and temperatures or from hydrocarbon gases by chemical vapor deposition (CVD). \nProperties.\nDiamond is a solid form of pure carbon with its atoms arranged in a crystal. Solid carbon comes in different forms known as allotropes depending on the type of chemical bond. The two most common allotropes of pure carbon are diamond and graphite. In graphite, the bonds are sp2 orbital hybrids and the atoms form in planes, with each bound to three nearest neighbors, 120 degrees apart. In diamond, they are sp3 and the atoms form tetrahedra, with each bound to four nearest neighbors. Tetrahedra are rigid, the bonds are strong, and, of all known substances, diamond has the greatest number of atoms per unit volume, which is why it is both the hardest and the least compressible. It also has a high density, ranging from 3150 to 3530 kilograms per cubic metre (over three times the density of water) in natural diamonds and 3520\u00a0kg/m in pure diamond. In graphite, the bonds between nearest neighbors are even stronger, but the bonds between parallel adjacent planes are weak, so the planes easily slip past each other. Thus, graphite is much softer than diamond. However, the stronger bonds make graphite less flammable.\nDiamonds have been adopted for many uses because of the material's exceptional physical characteristics. It has the highest thermal conductivity and the highest sound velocity. It has low adhesion and friction, and its coefficient of thermal expansion is extremely low. Its optical transparency extends from the far infrared to the deep ultraviolet and it has high optical dispersion. It also has high electrical resistance. It is chemically inert, not reacting with most corrosive substances, and has excellent biological compatibility.\nThermodynamics.\nThe equilibrium pressure and temperature conditions for a transition between graphite and diamond are well established theoretically and experimentally. The equilibrium pressure varies linearly with temperature, between at and at (the diamond/graphite/liquid triple point). However, the phases have a wide region about this line where they can coexist. At standard temperature and pressure, and , the stable phase of carbon is graphite, but diamond is metastable, with a significant kinetic energy barrier that the atoms must overcome in order to reach the lower energy state, and its rate of conversion to graphite is negligible, with a timescale of millions to billions of years. However, at temperatures above about , diamond rapidly converts to graphite. Experiments have found that diamond in the presence of H\u2082O passes through an intermediate linear carbon phase.\nRapid conversion of graphite to diamond requires pressures well above the equilibrium line: at , a pressure of (about 350,000 standard atmospheres) is needed.\nAbove the graphite\u2013diamond\u2013liquid carbon triple point, the melting point of diamond increases slowly with increasing pressure; but at pressures of hundreds of GPa, it decreases. At high pressures, silicon and germanium have a BC8 body-centered cubic crystal structure, and a similar structure is predicted for carbon at high pressures. At , the transition is predicted to occur at .\nResults published in \"Nature Physics\" in 2010 suggest that, at ultra-high pressures and temperatures (about 10\u00a0million atmospheres or 1\u00a0TPa and 50,000\u00a0\u00b0C), diamond melts into a metallic fluid. The extreme conditions required for this to occur are present in the ice giant planets Neptune, both of which are made up of approximately 10 percent carbon and could hypothetically contain oceans of liquid carbon. Since large quantities of metallic fluid can affect the magnetic field, this could serve to explain why the geographic and magnetic poles of the two planets are not aligned.\nCrystal structure.\nThe most common crystal structure of diamond is called diamond cubic. It is formed of unit cells (see the figure) stacked together. Although there are 18 atoms in the figure, each corner atom is shared by eight unit cells and each atom in the center of a face is shared by two, so there are a total of eight atoms per unit cell. The length of each side of the unit cell is denoted by \"a\" and is 3.567\u00a0angstroms.\nThe nearest neighbor distance in the diamond lattice is 1.732\"a\"/4 where \"a\" is the lattice constant, usually given in Angstr\u00f8ms as \"a\" = 3.567\u00a0\u00c5, which is 0.3567\u00a0nm.\nA diamond cubic lattice can be thought of as two interpenetrating face-centered cubic lattices with one displaced by of the diagonal along a cubic cell, or as one lattice with two atoms associated with each lattice point. Viewed from a crystallographic direction, it is formed of layers stacked in a repeating ABCABC ... pattern. Diamonds can also form an ABAB ... structure, which is known as hexagonal diamond or lonsdaleite, but this is far less common and is formed under different conditions from cubic carbon.\nCrystal habit.\nDiamonds occur most often as euhedral or rounded octahedra and twinned octahedra known as \"macles\". As diamond's crystal structure has a cubic arrangement of the atoms, they have many facets that belong to a cube, octahedron, rhombicosidodecahedron, tetrakis hexahedron, or disdyakis dodecahedron. The crystals can have rounded-off and unexpressive edges and can be elongated. Diamonds (especially those with rounded crystal faces) are commonly found coated in \"nyf\", an opaque gum-like skin.\nSome diamonds contain opaque fibers. They are referred to as \"opaque\" if the fibers grow from a clear substrate or \"fibrous\" if they occupy the entire crystal. Their colors range from yellow to green or gray, sometimes with cloud-like white to gray impurities. Their most common shape is cuboidal, but they can also form octahedra, dodecahedra, macles, or combined shapes. The structure is the result of numerous impurities with sizes between 1 and 5 microns. These diamonds probably formed in kimberlite magma and sampled the volatiles.\nDiamonds can also form polycrystalline aggregates. There have been attempts to classify them into groups with names such as boart, ballas, stewartite, and framesite, but there is no widely accepted set of criteria. Carbonado, a type in which the diamond grains were sintered (fused without melting by the application of heat and pressure), is black in color and tougher than single crystal diamond. It has never been observed in a volcanic rock. There are many theories for its origin, including formation in a star, but no consensus.\nMechanical.\nHardness.\nDiamond is the hardest material on the qualitative Mohs scale. To conduct the quantitative Vickers hardness test, samples of materials are struck with a pyramid of standardized dimensions using a known force \u2013 a diamond crystal is used for the pyramid to permit a wide range of materials to be tested. From the size of the resulting indentation, a Vickers hardness value for the material can be determined. Diamond's great hardness relative to other materials has been known since antiquity, and is the source of its name. This does not mean that it is infinitely hard, indestructible, or unscratchable. Indeed, diamonds can be scratched by other diamonds and worn down over time even by softer materials, such as vinyl phonograph records.\nDiamond hardness depends on its purity, crystalline perfection, and orientation: hardness is higher for flawless, pure crystals oriented to the &lt;111&gt; direction (along the longest diagonal of the cubic diamond lattice). Therefore, whereas it might be possible to scratch some diamonds with other materials, such as boron nitride, the hardest diamonds can only be scratched by other diamonds and nanocrystalline diamond aggregates.\nThe hardness of diamond contributes to its suitability as a gemstone. Because it can only be scratched by other diamonds, it maintains its polish extremely well. Unlike many other gems, it is well-suited to daily wear because of its resistance to scratching\u2014perhaps contributing to its popularity as the preferred gem in engagement or wedding rings, which are often worn every day.\nThe hardest natural diamonds mostly originate from the Copeton and Bingara fields located in the New England area in New South Wales, Australia. These diamonds are generally small, perfect to semiperfect octahedra, and are used to polish other diamonds. Their hardness is associated with the crystal growth form, which is single-stage crystal growth. Most other diamonds show more evidence of multiple growth stages, which produce inclusions, flaws, and defect planes in the crystal lattice, all of which affect their hardness. It is possible to treat regular diamonds under a combination of high pressure and high temperature to produce diamonds that are harder than the diamonds used in hardness gauges.\nDiamonds cut glass, but this does not positively identify a diamond because other materials, such as quartz, also lie above glass on the Mohs scale and can also cut it. Diamonds can scratch other diamonds, but this can result in damage to one or both stones. Hardness tests are infrequently used in practical gemology because of their potentially destructive nature. The extreme hardness and high value of diamond means that gems are typically polished slowly, using painstaking traditional techniques and greater attention to detail than is the case with most other gemstones; these tend to result in extremely flat, highly polished facets with exceptionally sharp facet edges. Diamonds also possess an extremely high refractive index and fairly high dispersion. Taken together, these factors affect the overall appearance of a polished diamond and most diamantaires still rely upon skilled use of a loupe (magnifying glass) to identify diamonds \"by eye\".\nToughness.\nSomewhat related to hardness is another mechanical property \"toughness\", which is a material's ability to resist breakage from forceful impact. The toughness of natural diamond has been measured as 50\u201365\u00a0MPa\u00b7m1/2. This value is good compared to other ceramic materials, but poor compared to most engineering materials such as engineering alloys, which typically exhibit toughness over 80MPa\u00b7m1/2. As with any material, the macroscopic geometry of a diamond contributes to its resistance to breakage. Diamond has a cleavage plane and is therefore more fragile in some orientations than others. Diamond cutters use this attribute to cleave some stones before faceting them. \"Impact toughness\" is one of the main indexes to measure the quality of synthetic industrial diamonds.\nYield strength.\nDiamond has compressive yield strength of 130\u2013140GPa. This exceptionally high value, along with the hardness and transparency of diamond, are the reasons that diamond anvil cells are the main tool for high pressure experiments. These anvils have reached pressures of . Much higher pressures may be possible with nanocrystalline diamonds.\nElasticity and tensile strength.\nUsually, attempting to deform bulk diamond crystal by tension or bending results in brittle fracture. However, when single crystalline diamond is in the form of micro/nanoscale wires or needles (~100\u2013300nanometers in diameter, micrometers long), they can be elastically stretched by as much as 9\u201310 percent tensile strain without failure, with a maximum local tensile stress of about , very close to the theoretical limit for this material.\nElectrical conductivity.\nOther specialized applications also exist or are being developed, including use as semiconductors: some blue diamonds are natural semiconductors, in contrast to most diamonds, which are excellent electrical insulators. The conductivity and blue color originate from boron impurity. Boron substitutes for carbon atoms in the diamond lattice, donating a hole into the valence band.\nSubstantial conductivity is commonly observed in nominally undoped diamond grown by chemical vapor deposition. This conductivity is associated with hydrogen-related species adsorbed at the surface, and it can be removed by annealing or other surface treatments.\nThin needles of diamond can be made to vary their electronic band gap from the normal 5.6 eV to near zero by selective mechanical deformation.\nHigh-purity diamond wafers 5\u00a0cm in diameter exhibit perfect resistance in one direction and perfect conductance in the other, creating the possibility of using them for quantum data storage. The material contains only 3 parts per million of nitrogen. The diamond was grown on a stepped substrate, which eliminated cracking.\nSurface property.\nDiamonds are naturally lipophilic and hydrophobic, which means the diamonds' surface cannot be wet by water, but can be easily wet and stuck by oil. This property can be utilized to extract diamonds using oil when making synthetic diamonds. However, when diamond surfaces are chemically modified with certain ions, they are expected to become so hydrophilic that they can stabilize multiple layers of water ice at human body temperature.\nThe surface of diamonds is partially oxidized. The oxidized surface can be reduced by heat treatment under hydrogen flow. That is to say, this heat treatment partially removes oxygen-containing functional groups. But diamonds (sp3C) are unstable against high temperature (above about ) under atmospheric pressure. The structure gradually changes into sp2C above this temperature. Thus, diamonds should be reduced below this temperature.\nChemical stability.\nAt room temperature, diamonds do not react with any chemical reagents including strong acids and bases.\nIn an atmosphere of pure oxygen, diamond has an ignition point that ranges from to ; smaller crystals tend to burn more easily. It increases in temperature from red to white heat and burns with a pale blue flame, and continues to burn after the source of heat is removed. By contrast, in air the combustion will cease as soon as the heat is removed because the oxygen is diluted with nitrogen. A clear, flawless, transparent diamond is completely converted to carbon dioxide; any impurities will be left as ash. Heat generated from cutting a diamond will not ignite the diamond, and neither will a cigarette lighter, but house fires and blow torches are hot enough. Jewelers must be careful when molding the metal in a diamond ring.\nDiamond powder of an appropriate grain size (around 50microns) burns with a shower of sparks after ignition from a flame. Consequently, pyrotechnic compositions based on synthetic diamond powder can be prepared. The resulting sparks are of the usual red-orange color, comparable to charcoal, but show a very linear trajectory which is explained by their high density. Diamond also reacts with fluorine gas above about .\nColor.\nDiamond has a wide band gap of corresponding to the deep ultraviolet wavelength of 225nanometers. This means that pure diamond should transmit visible light and appear as a clear colorless crystal. Colors in diamond originate from lattice defects and impurities. The diamond crystal lattice is exceptionally strong, and only atoms of nitrogen, boron, and hydrogen can be introduced into diamond during the growth at significant concentrations (up to atomic percents). Transition metals nickel and cobalt, which are commonly used for growth of synthetic diamond by high-pressure high-temperature techniques, have been detected in diamond as individual atoms; the maximum concentration is 0.01% for nickel and even less for cobalt. Virtually any element can be introduced to diamond by ion implantation.\nNitrogen is by far the most common impurity found in gem diamonds and is responsible for the yellow and brown color in diamonds. Boron is responsible for the blue color. Color in diamond has two additional sources: irradiation (usually by alpha particles), that causes the color in green diamonds, and plastic deformation of the diamond crystal lattice. Plastic deformation is the cause of color in some brown and perhaps pink and red diamonds. In order of increasing rarity, yellow diamond is followed by brown, colorless, then by blue, green, black, pink, orange, purple, and red. \"Black\", or carbonado, diamonds are not truly black, but rather contain numerous dark inclusions that give the gems their dark appearance. Colored diamonds contain impurities or structural defects that cause the coloration, while pure or nearly pure diamonds are transparent and colorless. Most diamond impurities replace a carbon atom in the crystal lattice, known as a carbon flaw. The most common impurity, nitrogen, causes a slight to intense yellow coloration depending upon the type and concentration of nitrogen present. The Gemological Institute of America (GIA) classifies low saturation yellow and brown diamonds as diamonds in the \"normal color range\", and applies a grading scale from \"D\" (colorless) to \"Z\" (light yellow). Yellow diamonds of high color saturation or a different color, such as pink or blue, are called \"fancy colored\" diamonds and fall under a different grading scale.\nIn 2008, the Wittelsbach Diamond, a blue diamond once belonging to the King of Spain, fetched over US$24\u00a0million at a Christie's auction. In May 2009, a blue diamond fetched the highest price per carat ever paid for a diamond when it was sold at auction for 10.5\u00a0million Swiss francs (6.97\u00a0million euros, or US$9.5\u00a0million at the time). That record was, however, beaten the same year: a vivid pink diamond was sold for US$10.8\u00a0million in Hong Kong on December 1, 2009.\nClarity.\nClarity is one of the 4C's (color, clarity, cut and carat weight) that helps in identifying the quality of diamonds. The Gemological Institute of America (GIA) developed 11 clarity scales to decide the quality of a diamond for its sale value. The GIA clarity scale spans from Flawless (FL) to included (I) having internally flawless (IF), very, very slightly included (VVS), very slightly included (VS) and slightly included (SI) in between. Impurities in natural diamonds are due to the presence of natural minerals and oxides. The clarity scale grades the diamond based on the color, size, location of impurity and quantity of clarity visible under 10x magnification. Inclusions in diamond can be extracted by optical methods. The process is to take pre-enhancement images, identifying the inclusion removal part and finally removing the diamond facets and noises.\nFluorescence.\nBetween 25% and 35% of natural diamonds exhibit some degree of fluorescence when examined under invisible long-wave ultraviolet light or higher energy radiation sources such as X-rays and lasers. Incandescent lighting will not cause a diamond to fluoresce. Diamonds can fluoresce in a variety of colors including blue (most common), orange, yellow, white, green and very rarely red and purple. Although the causes are not well understood, variations in the atomic structure, such as the number of nitrogen atoms present are thought to contribute to the phenomenon.\nThermal conductivity.\nDiamonds can be identified by their high thermal conductivity (900\u2013). Their high refractive index is also indicative, but other materials have similar refractivity.\nGeology.\nDiamonds are extremely rare, with concentrations of at most parts per billion in source rock. Before the 20th century, most diamonds were found in alluvial deposits. Loose diamonds are also found along existing and ancient shorelines, where they tend to accumulate because of their size and density. Rarely, they have been found in glacial till (notably in Wisconsin and Indiana), but these deposits are not of commercial quality. These types of deposit were derived from localized igneous intrusions through weathering and transport by wind or water.\nMost diamonds come from the Earth's mantle, and most of this section discusses those diamonds. However, there are other sources. Some blocks of the crust, or terranes, have been buried deep enough as the crust thickened so they experienced ultra-high-pressure metamorphism. These have evenly distributed \"microdiamonds\" that show no sign of transport by magma. In addition, when meteorites strike the ground, the shock wave can produce high enough temperatures and pressures for \"microdiamonds\" and \"nanodiamonds\" to form. Impact-type microdiamonds can be used as an indicator of ancient impact craters. Popigai impact structure in Russia may have the world's largest diamond deposit, estimated at trillions of carats, and formed by an asteroid impact.\nA common misconception is that diamonds form from highly compressed coal. Coal is formed from buried prehistoric plants, and most diamonds that have been dated are far older than the first land plants. It is possible that diamonds can form from coal in subduction zones, but diamonds formed in this way are rare, and the carbon source is more likely carbonate rocks and organic carbon in sediments, rather than coal.\nSurface distribution.\nDiamonds are far from evenly distributed over the Earth. A rule of thumb known as Clifford's rule states that they are almost always found in kimberlites on the oldest part of cratons, the stable cores of continents with typical ages of 2.5billion years or more. However, there are exceptions. The Argyle diamond mine in Australia, the largest producer of diamonds by weight in the world, is located in a \"mobile belt\", also known as an \"orogenic belt\", a weaker zone surrounding the central craton that has undergone compressional tectonics. Instead of kimberlite, the host rock is lamproite. Lamproites with diamonds that are not economically viable are also found in the United States, India, and Australia. In addition, diamonds in the Wawa belt of the Superior province in Canada and microdiamonds in the island arc of Japan are found in a type of rock called lamprophyre.\nKimberlites can be found in narrow (1 to 4 meters) dikes and sills, and in pipes with diameters that range from about 75 m to 1.5\u00a0km. Fresh rock is dark bluish green to greenish gray, but after exposure rapidly turns brown and crumbles. It is hybrid rock with a chaotic mixture of small minerals and rock fragments (clasts) up to the size of watermelons. They are a mixture of xenocrysts and xenoliths (minerals and rocks carried up from the lower crust and mantle), pieces of surface rock, altered minerals such as serpentine, and new minerals that crystallized during the eruption. The texture varies with depth. The composition forms a continuum with carbonatites, but the latter have too much oxygen for carbon to exist in a pure form. Instead, it is locked up in the mineral calcite ().\nAll three of the diamond-bearing rocks (kimberlite, lamproite and lamprophyre) lack certain minerals (melilite and kalsilite) that are incompatible with diamond formation. In kimberlite, olivine is large and conspicuous, while lamproite has Ti-phlogopite and lamprophyre has biotite and amphibole. They are all derived from magma types that erupt rapidly from small amounts of melt, are rich in volatiles and magnesium oxide, and are less oxidizing than more common mantle melts such as basalt. These characteristics allow the melts to carry diamonds to the surface before they dissolve.\nExploration.\nKimberlite pipes can be difficult to find. They weather quickly (within a few years after exposure) and tend to have lower topographic relief than surrounding rock. If they are visible in outcrops, the diamonds are never visible because they are so rare. In any case, kimberlites are often covered with vegetation, sediments, soils, or lakes. In modern searches, geophysical methods such as aeromagnetic surveys, electrical resistivity, and gravimetry, help identify promising regions to explore. This is aided by isotopic dating and modeling of the geological history. Then surveyors must go to the area and collect samples, looking for kimberlite fragments or \"indicator minerals\". The latter have compositions that reflect the conditions where diamonds form, such as extreme melt depletion or high pressures in eclogites. However, indicator minerals can be misleading; a better approach is geothermobarometry, where the compositions of minerals are analyzed as if they were in equilibrium with mantle minerals.\nFinding kimberlites requires persistence, and only a small fraction contain diamonds that are commercially viable. The only major discoveries since about 1980 have been in Canada. Since existing mines have lifetimes of as little as 25 years, there could be a shortage of new natural diamonds in the future.\nAges.\nDiamonds are dated by analyzing inclusions using the decay of radioactive isotopes. Depending on the elemental abundances, one can look at the decay of rubidium to strontium, samarium to neodymium, uranium to lead, argon-40 to argon-39, or rhenium to osmium. Those found in kimberlites have ages ranging from , and there can be multiple ages in the same kimberlite, indicating multiple episodes of diamond formation. The kimberlites themselves are much younger. Most of them have ages between tens of millions and 300 million years old, although there are some older exceptions (Argyle, Premier and Wawa). Thus, the kimberlites formed independently of the diamonds and served only to transport them to the surface. Kimberlites are also much younger than the cratons they have erupted through. The reason for the lack of older kimberlites is unknown, but it suggests there was some change in mantle chemistry or tectonics. No kimberlite has erupted in human history.\nOrigin in mantle.\nMost gem-quality diamonds come from depths of 150\u2013250\u00a0km in the lithosphere. Such depths occur below cratons in \"mantle keels\", the thickest part of the lithosphere. These regions have high enough pressure and temperature to allow diamonds to form and they are not convecting, so diamonds can be stored for billions of years until a kimberlite eruption samples them.\nHost rocks in a mantle keel include harzburgite and lherzolite, two type of peridotite. The most dominant rock type in the upper mantle, peridotite is an igneous rock consisting mostly of the minerals olivine and pyroxene; it is low in silica and high in magnesium. However, diamonds in peridotite rarely survive the trip to the surface. Another common source that does keep diamonds intact is eclogite, a metamorphic rock that typically forms from basalt as an oceanic plate plunges into the mantle at a subduction zone.\nA smaller fraction of diamonds (about 150 have been studied) come from depths of 330\u2013660\u00a0km, a region that includes the transition zone. They formed in eclogite but are distinguished from diamonds of shallower origin by inclusions of majorite (a form of garnet with excess silicon). A similar proportion of diamonds comes from the lower mantle at depths between 660 and 800\u00a0km.\nDiamond is thermodynamically stable at high pressures and temperatures, with the phase transition from graphite occurring at greater temperatures as the pressure increases. Thus, underneath continents it becomes stable at temperatures of 950degrees Celsius and pressures of 4.5 gigapascals, corresponding to depths of 150kilometers or greater. In subduction zones, which are colder, it becomes stable at temperatures of 800\u00a0\u00b0C and pressures of 3.5gigapascals. At depths greater than 240\u00a0km, iron\u2013nickel metal phases are present and carbon is likely to be either dissolved in them or in the form of carbides. Thus, the deeper origin of some diamonds may reflect unusual growth environments.\nIn 2018 the first known natural samples of a phase of ice called Ice VII were found as inclusions in diamond samples. The inclusions formed at depths between 400 and 800\u00a0km, straddling the upper and lower mantle, and provide evidence for water-rich fluid at these depths.\nCarbon sources.\nThe mantle has roughly one billion gigatonnes of carbon (for comparison, the atmosphere-ocean system has about 44,000 gigatonnes). Carbon has two stable isotopes, 12C and 13C, in a ratio of approximately 99:1 by mass. This ratio has a wide range in meteorites, which implies that it also varied a lot in the early Earth. It can also be altered by surface processes like photosynthesis. The fraction is generally compared to a standard sample using a ratio \u03b413C expressed in parts per thousand. Common rocks from the mantle such as basalts, carbonatites, and kimberlites have ratios between \u22128 and \u22122. On the surface, organic sediments have an average of \u221225 while carbonates have an average of 0.\nPopulations of diamonds from different sources have distributions of \u03b413C that vary markedly. Peridotitic diamonds are mostly within the typical mantle range; eclogitic diamonds have values from \u221240 to +3, although the peak of the distribution is in the mantle range. This variability implies that they are not formed from carbon that is \"primordial\" (having resided in the mantle since the Earth formed). Instead, they are the result of tectonic processes, although (given the ages of diamonds) not necessarily the same tectonic processes that act in the present. Diamond-forming carbon originates in the top 700 kilometers (430 mi) or so of the upper mantle closest to the surface, known as the asthenosphere.\nFormation and growth.\nDiamonds in the mantle form through a \"metasomatic\" process where a C\u2013O\u2013H\u2013N\u2013S fluid or melt dissolves minerals in a rock and replaces them with new minerals. (The vague term C\u2013O\u2013H\u2013N\u2013S is commonly used because the exact composition is not known.) Diamonds form from this fluid either by reduction of oxidized carbon (e.g., CO2 or CO3) or oxidation of a reduced phase such as methane.\nUsing probes such as polarized light, photoluminescence, and cathodoluminescence, a series of growth zones can be identified in diamonds. The characteristic pattern in diamonds from the lithosphere involves a nearly concentric series of zones with very thin oscillations in luminescence and alternating episodes where the carbon is resorbed by the fluid and then grown again. Diamonds from below the lithosphere have a more irregular, almost polycrystalline texture, reflecting the higher temperatures and pressures as well as the transport of the diamonds by convection.\nTransport to the surface.\nGeological evidence supports a model in which kimberlite magma rises at 4\u201320 meters per second, creating an upward path by hydraulic fracturing of the rock. As the pressure decreases, a vapor phase exsolves from the magma, and this helps to keep the magma fluid. At the surface, the initial eruption explodes out through fissures at high speeds (over ). Then, at lower pressures, the rock is eroded, forming a pipe and producing fragmented rock (breccia). As the eruption wanes, there is pyroclastic phase and then metamorphism and hydration produces serpentinites.\nDouble diamonds.\nIn rare cases, diamonds have been found that contain a cavity within which is a second diamond. The first double diamond, the Matryoshka, was found by Alrosa in Yakutia, Russia, in 2019. Another one was found in the Ellendale Diamond Field in Western Australia in 2021.\nIn space.\nAlthough diamonds on Earth are rare, they are very common in space. In meteorites, about three percent of the carbon is in the form of nanodiamonds, having diameters of a few nanometers. Sufficiently small diamonds can form in the cold of space because their lower surface energy makes them more stable than graphite. The isotopic signatures of some nanodiamonds indicate they were formed outside the Solar System in stars.\nHigh pressure experiments predict that large quantities of diamonds condense from methane into a \"diamond rain\" on the ice giant planets Uranus and Neptune. Some extrasolar planets may be almost entirely composed of diamond.\nDiamonds may exist in carbon-rich stars, particularly white dwarfs. One theory for the origin of carbonado, the toughest form of diamond, is that it originated in a white dwarf or supernova. Diamonds formed in stars may have been the first minerals.\nIndustry.\nThe most familiar uses of diamonds today are as gemstones used for adornment, and as industrial abrasives for cutting hard materials. The markets for gem-grade and industrial-grade diamonds value diamonds differently.\nGem-grade diamonds.\nThe dispersion of white light into spectral colors is the primary gemological characteristic of gem diamonds. In the 20th century, experts in gemology developed methods of grading diamonds and other gemstones based on the characteristics most important to their value as a gem. Four characteristics, known informally as the \"four Cs\", are now commonly used as the basic descriptors of diamonds: these are its mass in \"carats\" (a carat being equal to 0.2grams), \"cut\" (quality of the cut is graded according to proportions, symmetry and polish), \"color\" (how close to white or colorless; for fancy diamonds how intense is its hue), and \"clarity\" (how free is it from inclusions). A large, flawless diamond is known as a paragon.\nA large trade in gem-grade diamonds exists. Although most gem-grade diamonds are sold newly polished, there is a well-established market for resale of polished diamonds (e.g. pawnbroking, auctions, second-hand jewelry stores, diamantaires, bourses, etc.). One hallmark of the trade in gem-quality diamonds is its remarkable concentration: wholesale trade and diamond cutting is limited to just a few locations; in 2003, 92% of the world's diamonds were cut and polished in Surat, India. Other important centers of diamond cutting and trading are the Antwerp diamond district in Belgium, where the International Gemological Institute is based, London, the Diamond District in New York City, the Diamond Exchange District in Tel Aviv and Amsterdam. One contributory factor is the geological nature of diamond deposits: several large primary kimberlite-pipe mines each account for significant portions of market share (such as the Jwaneng mine in Botswana, which is a single large-pit mine that can produce between of diamonds per year). Secondary alluvial diamond deposits, on the other hand, tend to be fragmented amongst many different operators because they can be dispersed over many hundreds of square kilometers (e.g., alluvial deposits in Brazil).\nThe production and distribution of diamonds is largely consolidated in the hands of a few key players, and concentrated in traditional diamond trading centers, the most important being Antwerp, where 80% of all rough diamonds, 50% of all cut diamonds and more than 50% of all rough, cut and industrial diamonds combined are handled. This makes Antwerp a de facto \"world diamond capital\". The city of Antwerp also hosts the Antwerpsche Diamantkring, created in 1929 to become the first and biggest diamond bourse dedicated to rough diamonds. Another important diamond center is New York City, where almost 80% of the world's diamonds are sold, including auction sales.\nThe De Beers company, as the world's largest diamond mining company, holds a dominant position in the industry, and has done so since soon after its founding in 1888 by the British businessman Cecil Rhodes. De Beers is currently the world's largest operator of diamond production facilities (mines) and distribution channels for gem-quality diamonds. The Diamond Trading Company (DTC) is a subsidiary of De Beers and markets rough diamonds from De Beers-operated mines. De Beers and its subsidiaries own mines that produce some 40% of annual world diamond production. For most of the 20th century over 80% of the world's rough diamonds passed through De Beers, but by 2001\u20132009 the figure had decreased to around 45%, and by 2013 the company's market share had further decreased to around 38% in value terms and even less by volume. De Beers sold off the vast majority of its diamond stockpile in the late 1990s \u2013 early 2000s and the remainder largely represents working stock (diamonds that are being sorted before sale). This was well documented in the press but remains little known to the general public.\nAs a part of reducing its influence, De Beers withdrew from purchasing diamonds on the open market in 1999 and ceased, at the end of 2008, purchasing Russian diamonds mined by the largest Russian diamond company Alrosa. As of January 2011, De Beers states that it only sells diamonds from the following four countries: Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Canada. Alrosa had to suspend their sales in October 2008 due to the global energy crisis, but the company reported that it had resumed selling rough diamonds on the open market by October 2009. Apart from Alrosa, other important diamond mining companies include BHP, which is the world's largest mining company; Rio Tinto, the owner of the Argyle (100%), Diavik (60%), and Murowa (78%) diamond mines; and Petra Diamonds, the owner of several major diamond mines in Africa.\nFurther down the supply chain, members of The World Federation of Diamond Bourses (WFDB) act as a medium for wholesale diamond exchange, trading both polished and rough diamonds. The WFDB consists of independent diamond bourses in major cutting centers such as Tel Aviv, Antwerp, Johannesburg and other cities across the US, Europe and Asia. In 2000, the WFDB and The International Diamond Manufacturers Association established the World Diamond Council to prevent the trading of diamonds used to fund war and inhumane acts. WFDB's additional activities include sponsoring the World Diamond Congress every two years, as well as the establishment of the International Diamond Council (IDC) to oversee diamond grading.\nOnce purchased by Sightholders (which is a trademark term referring to the companies that have a three-year supply contract with DTC), diamonds are cut and polished in preparation for sale as gemstones ('industrial' stones are regarded as a by-product of the gemstone market; they are used for abrasives). The cutting and polishing of rough diamonds is a specialized skill that is concentrated in a limited number of locations worldwide. Traditional diamond cutting centers are Antwerp, Amsterdam, Johannesburg, New York City, and Tel Aviv. Recently, diamond cutting centers have been established in China, India, Thailand, Namibia and Botswana. Cutting centers with lower cost of labor, notably Surat in Gujarat, India, handle a larger number of smaller carat diamonds, while smaller quantities of larger or more valuable diamonds are more likely to be handled in Europe or North America. The recent expansion of this industry in India, employing low cost labor, has allowed smaller diamonds to be prepared as gems in greater quantities than was previously economically feasible.\nDiamonds prepared as gemstones are sold on diamond exchanges called \"bourses\". There are 28 registered diamond bourses in the world. Bourses are the final tightly controlled step in the diamond supply chain; wholesalers and even retailers are able to buy relatively small lots of diamonds at the bourses, after which they are prepared for final sale to the consumer. Diamonds can be sold already set in jewelry, or sold unset (\"loose\"). According to the Rio Tinto, in 2002 the diamonds produced and released to the market were valued at US$9\u00a0billion as rough diamonds, US$14\u00a0billion after being cut and polished, US$28\u00a0billion in wholesale diamond jewelry, and US$57\u00a0billion in retail sales.\nCutting.\nMined rough diamonds are converted into gems through a multi-step process called \"cutting\". Diamonds are extremely hard, but also brittle and can be split up by a single blow. Therefore, diamond cutting is traditionally considered as a delicate procedure requiring skills, scientific knowledge, tools and experience. Its final goal is to produce a faceted jewel where the specific angles between the facets would optimize the diamond luster, that is dispersion of white light, whereas the number and area of facets would determine the weight of the final product. The weight reduction upon cutting is significant and can be of the order of 50%. Several possible shapes are considered, but the final decision is often determined not only by scientific, but also practical considerations. For example, the diamond might be intended for display or for wear, in a ring or a necklace, singled or surrounded by other gems of certain color and shape. Some of them may be considered as classical, such as round, pear, marquise, oval, hearts and arrows diamonds, etc. Some of them are special, produced by certain companies, for example, Phoenix, Cushion, Sole Mio diamonds, etc.\nThe most time-consuming part of the cutting is the preliminary analysis of the rough stone. It needs to address a large number of issues, bears much responsibility, and therefore can last years in case of unique diamonds. The following issues are considered:\nAfter initial cutting, the diamond is shaped in numerous stages of polishing. Unlike cutting, which is a responsible but quick operation, polishing removes material by gradual erosion and is extremely time-consuming. The associated technique is well developed; it is considered as a routine and can be performed by technicians. After polishing, the diamond is reexamined for possible flaws, either remaining or induced by the process. Those flaws are concealed through various diamond enhancement techniques, such as repolishing, crack filling, or clever arrangement of the stone in the jewelry. Remaining non-diamond inclusions are removed through laser drilling and filling of the voids produced.\nMarketing.\nMarketing has significantly affected the image of diamond as a valuable commodity.\nN. W. Ayer &amp; Son, the advertising firm retained by De Beers in the mid-20th century, succeeded in reviving the American diamond market and the firm created new markets in countries where no diamond tradition had existed before. N. W. Ayer's marketing included product placement, advertising focused on the diamond product itself rather than the De Beers brand, and associations with celebrities and royalty. Without advertising the De Beers brand, De Beers was advertising its competitors' diamond products as well, but this was not a concern as De Beers dominated the diamond market throughout the 20th century. De Beers' market share dipped temporarily to second place in the global market below Alrosa in the aftermath of the global economic crisis of 2008, down to less than 29% in terms of carats mined, rather than sold. The campaign lasted for decades but was effectively discontinued by early 2011. De Beers still advertises diamonds, but the advertising now mostly promotes its own brands, or licensed product lines, rather than completely \"generic\" diamond products. The campaign was perhaps best captured by the slogan \"a diamond is forever\". This slogan is now being used by De Beers Diamond Jewelers, a jewelry firm which is a 50/50% joint venture between the De Beers mining company and LVMH, the luxury goods conglomerate.\nBrown-colored diamonds constituted a significant part of the diamond production, and were predominantly used for industrial purposes. They were seen as worthless for jewelry (not even being assessed on the diamond color scale). After the development of Argyle diamond mine in Australia in 1986, and marketing, brown diamonds have become acceptable gems. The change was mostly due to the numbers: the Argyle mine, with its of diamonds per year, makes about one-third of global production of natural diamonds; 80% of Argyle diamonds are brown.\nIndustrial-grade diamonds.\nIndustrial diamonds are valued mostly for their hardness and thermal conductivity, making many of the gemological characteristics of diamonds, such as the 4 Cs, irrelevant for most applications. Eighty percent of mined diamonds (equal to about annually) are unsuitable for use as gemstones and are used industrially. In addition to mined diamonds, synthetic diamonds found industrial applications almost immediately after their invention in the 1950s; in 2014, of synthetic diamonds were produced, 90% of which were produced in China. Approximately 90% of diamond grinding grit is currently of synthetic origin.\nThe boundary between gem-quality diamonds and industrial diamonds is poorly defined and partly depends on market conditions (for example, if demand for polished diamonds is high, some lower-grade stones will be polished into low-quality or small gemstones rather than being sold for industrial use). Within the category of industrial diamonds, there is a sub-category comprising the lowest-quality, mostly opaque stones, which are known as bort.\nIndustrial use of diamonds has historically been associated with their hardness, which makes diamond the ideal material for cutting and grinding tools. As the hardest known naturally occurring material, diamond can be used to polish, cut, or wear away any material, including other diamonds. Common industrial applications of this property include diamond-tipped drill bits and saws, and the use of diamond powder as an abrasive. Less expensive industrial-grade diamonds (bort) with more flaws and poorer color than gems, are used for such purposes. Diamond is not suitable for machining ferrous alloys at high speeds, as carbon is soluble in iron at the high temperatures created by high-speed machining, leading to greatly increased wear on diamond tools compared to alternatives.\nSpecialized applications include use in laboratories as containment for high-pressure experiments (see diamond anvil cell), high-performance bearings, and limited use in specialized windows. With the continuing advances being made in the production of synthetic diamonds, future applications are becoming feasible. The high thermal conductivity of diamond makes it suitable as a heat sink for integrated circuits in electronics.\nMining.\nApproximately of diamonds are mined annually, with a total value of nearly US$9\u00a0billion, and about are synthesized annually.\nRoughly 49% of diamonds originate from Central and Southern Africa, although significant sources of the mineral have been discovered in Canada, India, Russia, Brazil, and Australia. They are mined from kimberlite and lamproite volcanic pipes, which can bring diamond crystals, originating from deep within the Earth where high pressures and temperatures enable them to form, to the surface. The mining and distribution of natural diamonds are subjects of frequent controversy such as concerns over the sale of \"blood diamonds\" or \"conflict diamonds\" by African paramilitary groups. The diamond supply chain is controlled by a limited number of powerful businesses, and is also highly concentrated in a small number of locations around the world.\nOnly a very small fraction of the diamond ore consists of actual diamonds. The ore is crushed, during which care is required not to destroy larger diamonds, and then sorted by density. Today, diamonds are located in the diamond-rich density fraction with the help of X-ray fluorescence, after which the final sorting steps are done by hand. Before the use of X-rays became commonplace, the separation was done with grease belts; diamonds have a stronger tendency to stick to grease than the other minerals in the ore.\nHistorically, diamonds were found only in alluvial deposits in Guntur and Krishna district of the Krishna River delta in Southern India. India led the world in diamond production from the time of their discovery in approximately the 9th century BC to the mid-18th century AD, but the commercial potential of these sources had been exhausted by the late 18th century and at that time India was eclipsed by Brazil where the first non-Indian diamonds were found in 1725. Currently, one of the most prominent Indian mines is located at Panna.\nDiamond extraction from primary deposits (kimberlites and lamproites) started in the 1870s after the discovery of the Diamond Fields in South Africa. Production has increased over time and now an accumulated total of have been mined since that date. Twenty percent of that amount has been mined in the last five years, and during the last 10 years, nine new mines have started production; four more are waiting to be opened soon. Most of these mines are located in Canada, Zimbabwe, Angola, and one in Russia.\nIn the U.S., diamonds have been found in Arkansas, Colorado, New Mexico, Wyoming, and Montana. In 2004, the discovery of a microscopic diamond in the U.S. led to the January 2008 bulk-sampling of kimberlite pipes in a remote part of Montana. The Crater of Diamonds State Park in Arkansas is open to the public, and is the only mine in the world where members of the public can dig for diamonds.\nToday, most commercially viable diamond deposits are in Russia (mostly in Sakha Republic, for example Mir pipe and Udachnaya pipe), Botswana, Australia (Northern and Western Australia) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In 2005, Russia produced almost one-fifth of the global diamond output, according to the British Geological Survey. Australia boasts the richest diamantiferous pipe, with production from the Argyle diamond mine reaching peak levels of 42metric tons per year in the 1990s. There are also commercial deposits being actively mined in the Northwest Territories of Canada and Brazil. Diamond prospectors continue to search the globe for diamond-bearing kimberlite and lamproite pipes.\nPolitical issues.\nIn some of the more politically unstable central African and west African countries, revolutionary groups have taken control of diamond mines, using proceeds from diamond sales to finance their operations. Diamonds sold through this process are known as \"conflict diamonds\" or \"blood diamonds\".\nIn response to public concerns that their diamond purchases were contributing to war and human rights abuses in central and western Africa, the United Nations, the diamond industry and diamond-trading nations introduced the Kimberley Process in 2002. The Kimberley Process aims to ensure that conflict diamonds do not become intermixed with the diamonds not controlled by such rebel groups. This is done by requiring diamond-producing countries to provide proof that the money they make from selling the diamonds is not used to fund criminal or revolutionary activities. Although the Kimberley Process has been moderately successful in limiting the number of conflict diamonds entering the market, some still find their way in. According to the International Diamond Manufacturers Association, conflict diamonds constitute 2\u20133% of all diamonds traded. Two major flaws still hinder the effectiveness of the Kimberley Process: (1) the relative ease of smuggling diamonds across African borders, and (2) the violent nature of diamond mining in nations that are not in a technical state of war and whose diamonds are therefore considered \"clean\".\nThe Canadian Government has set up a body known as the Canadian Diamond Code of Conduct to help authenticate Canadian diamonds. This is a stringent tracking system of diamonds and helps protect the \"conflict free\" label of Canadian diamonds.\nMineral resource exploitation in general causes irreversible environmental damage, which must be weighed against the socio-economic benefits to a country.\nSynthetics, simulants, and enhancements.\nSynthetics.\nSynthetic diamonds are diamonds manufactured in a laboratory, as opposed to diamonds mined from the Earth. The gemological and industrial uses of diamond have created a large demand for rough stones. This demand has been satisfied in large part by synthetic diamonds, which have been manufactured by various processes for more than half a century. However, in recent years it has become possible to produce gem-quality synthetic diamonds of significant size. It is possible to make colorless synthetic gemstones that, on a molecular level, are identical to natural stones and so visually similar that only a gemologist with special equipment can tell the difference.\nThe majority of commercially available synthetic diamonds are yellow and are produced by so-called \"high-pressure high-temperature\" (HPHT) processes. The yellow color is caused by nitrogen impurities. Other colors may also be reproduced such as blue, green or pink, which are a result of the addition of boron or from irradiation after synthesis.\nAnother popular method of growing synthetic diamond is chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The growth occurs under low pressure (below atmospheric pressure). It involves feeding a mixture of gases (typically to hydrogen) into a chamber and splitting them into chemically active radicals in a plasma ignited by microwaves, hot filament, arc discharge, welding torch, or laser. This method is mostly used for coatings, but can also produce single crystals several millimeters in size (see picture).\nAs of 2010, nearly all 5,000\u00a0million carats (1,000tonnes) of synthetic diamonds produced per year are for industrial use. Around 50% of the 133\u00a0million carats of natural diamonds mined per year end up in industrial use. Mining companies' expenses average 40 to 60\u00a0US dollars per carat for natural colorless diamonds, while synthetic manufacturers' expenses average for synthetic, gem-quality colorless diamonds. However, a purchaser is more likely to encounter a synthetic when looking for a fancy-colored diamond because only 0.01% of natural diamonds are fancy-colored, while most synthetic diamonds are colored in some way.\nSimulants.\nA diamond simulant is a non-diamond material that is used to simulate the appearance of a diamond, and may be referred to as diamante. Cubic zirconia is the most common. The gemstone moissanite (silicon carbide) can be treated as a diamond simulant, though more costly to produce than cubic zirconia. Both are produced synthetically.\nEnhancements.\nDiamond enhancements are specific treatments performed on natural or synthetic diamonds (usually those already cut and polished into a gem), which are designed to better the gemological characteristics of the stone in one or more ways. These include laser drilling to remove inclusions, application of sealants to fill cracks, treatments to improve a white diamond's color grade, and treatments to give fancy color to a white diamond.\nCoatings are increasingly used to give a diamond simulant such as cubic zirconia a more \"diamond-like\" appearance. One such substance is diamond-like carbon\u2014an amorphous carbonaceous material that has some physical properties similar to those of the diamond. Advertising suggests that such a coating would transfer some of these diamond-like properties to the coated stone, hence enhancing the diamond simulant. Techniques such as Raman spectroscopy should easily identify such a treatment.\nIdentification.\nEarly diamond identification tests included a scratch test relying on the superior hardness of diamond. This test is destructive, as a diamond can scratch another diamond, and is rarely used nowadays. Instead, diamond identification relies on its superior thermal conductivity. Electronic thermal probes are widely used in the gemological centers to separate diamonds from their imitations. These probes consist of a pair of battery-powered thermistors mounted in a fine copper tip. One thermistor functions as a heating device while the other measures the temperature of the copper tip: if the stone being tested is a diamond, it will conduct the tip's thermal energy rapidly enough to produce a measurable temperature drop. This test takes about two to three seconds.\nWhereas the thermal probe can separate diamonds from most of their simulants, distinguishing between various types of diamond, for example synthetic or natural, irradiated or non-irradiated, etc., requires more advanced, optical techniques. Those techniques are also used for some diamonds simulants, such as silicon carbide, which pass the thermal conductivity test. Optical techniques can distinguish between natural diamonds and synthetic diamonds. They can also identify the vast majority of treated natural diamonds. \"Perfect\" crystals (at the atomic lattice level) have never been found, so both natural and synthetic diamonds always possess characteristic imperfections, arising from the circumstances of their crystal growth, that allow them to be distinguished from each other.\nLaboratories use techniques such as spectroscopy, microscopy, and luminescence under shortwave ultraviolet light to determine a diamond's origin. They also use specially made instruments to aid them in the identification process. Two screening instruments are the \"DiamondSure\" and the \"DiamondView\", both produced by the DTC and marketed by the GIA.\nSeveral methods for identifying synthetic diamonds can be performed, depending on the method of production and the color of the diamond. CVD diamonds can usually be identified by an orange fluorescence. D\u2013J colored diamonds can be screened through the Swiss Gemmological Institute's Diamond Spotter. Stones in the D\u2013Z color range can be examined through the DiamondSure UV/visible spectrometer, a tool developed by De Beers. Similarly, natural diamonds usually have minor imperfections and flaws, such as inclusions of foreign material, that are not seen in synthetic diamonds.\nScreening devices based on diamond type detection can be used to make a distinction between diamonds that are certainly natural and diamonds that are potentially synthetic. Those potentially synthetic diamonds require more investigation in a specialized lab. Examples of commercial screening devices are D-Screen (WTOCD / HRD Antwerp), Alpha Diamond Analyzer (Bruker / HRD Antwerp), and D-Secure (DRC Techno).\nEtymology, earliest use and composition discovery.\nThe name \"diamond\" is derived from (\"ad\u00e1mas\"), 'proper, unalterable, unbreakable, untamed', from \u1f00- (\"a-\"), 'not' + (\"dam\u00e1\u014d\"), 'to overpower, tame'. Diamonds are thought to have been first recognized and mined in India, where significant alluvial deposits of the stone could be found many centuries ago along the rivers Penner, Krishna, and Godavari. Diamonds have been known in India for at least 3,000years but most likely 6,000years.\nDiamonds have been treasured as gemstones since their use as religious icons in ancient India. Their usage in engraving tools also dates to early human history. The popularity of diamonds has risen since the 19th century because of increased supply, improved cutting and polishing techniques, growth in the world economy, and innovative and successful advertising campaigns.\nIn 1772, the French scientist Antoine Lavoisier used a lens to concentrate the rays of the sun on a diamond in an atmosphere of oxygen, and showed that the only product of the combustion was carbon dioxide, proving that diamond is composed of carbon. Later, in 1797, the English chemist Smithson Tennant repeated and expanded that experiment. By demonstrating that burning diamond and graphite releases the same amount of gas, he established the chemical equivalence of these substances."}
{"id": "8083", "revid": "46085058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8083", "title": "Dr. Dre", "text": "Andre Romell Young (born February 18, 1965), known professionally as Dr. Dre, is an American rapper, record producer, record executive, and actor. He is the founder and CEO of Aftermath Entertainment and Beats Electronics, and co-founder of Death Row Records. Dre began his career as a member of the World Class Wreckin' Cru in 1984, and later found fame with the gangsta rap group N.W.A. The group popularized explicit lyrics in hip-hop to detail the violence of street life. During the early 1990s, Dre was credited as a key figure in the crafting and popularization of West Coast G-funk, a subgenre of hip-hop characterized by a synthesizer foundation and slow, heavy production.\nReleased as Death Row's first major project, Dr. Dre's debut solo album, \"The Chronic\" (1992), made him one of the best-selling American music artists of 1993. It earned him a Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance with its single \"Let Me Ride\", as well as several accolades for the single \"Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang\" (featuring Snoop Dogg). That same year, he produced Death Row labelmate Snoop Dogg's debut album \"Doggystyle\", and mentored producers such as his stepbrother Warren G (leading to the multi-platinum debut \"Regulate... G Funk Era\" in 1994) and Snoop Dogg's cousin Daz Dillinger (leading to the double-platinum debut \"Dogg Food\" by Tha Dogg Pound in 1995), as well as other producers including Mel-Man and Scott Storch. In 1996, Dre left Death Row Records to establish his own label, Aftermath Entertainment; his compilation album, \"\" (1996) and second studio album, \"2001\" (1999) followed thereafter.\nDuring the 2000s, Dr. Dre shifted focus onto production for other artists, occasionally contributing vocals. He signed Eminem in 1998 and 50 Cent in 2002, while extensively contributing to releases by both artists. Aftermath has since signed other artists including the Game, Kendrick Lamar, Anderson .Paak, Silk Sonic, Busta Rhymes, Eve, and Rakim, among others. He has won seven Grammy Awards, including Producer of the Year, Non-Classical. \"Rolling Stone\" ranked him number 56 on the list of 100 Greatest Artists of All Time. Outside of music, Dre has acted in films such as \"Set It Off\", \"The Wash\", and \"Training Day\".\nAccusations of Dr. Dre's violence against women have been widely publicized. Following his assault of television host Dee Barnes, he was fined US$2,500, given two years' probation, and ordered to perform 240 hours of community service, part of which he fulfilled by making an anti-violence public service announcement. A civil suit was settled out of court. In 2015, Michel'le, the mother of one of his children, accused him of domestic violence during their time together as a couple. The abusive relationship is portrayed in her 2016 biopic \"\". Lisa Johnson, the mother of three of Dre's children, stated that he beat her many times, including while she was pregnant. She was granted a restraining order against him. Former labelmate Tairrie B claimed that Dre assaulted her at a party in 1990, in response to her track \"Ruthless Bitch\". Two weeks following the release of his third album, \"Compton\" in August 2015, he issued an apology to the women \"I've hurt\".\nEarly life.\nAndre Romell Young was born in Compton, California, on February 18, 1965, the son of Theodore and Verna Young. His middle name is derived from the Romells, his father's amateur R&amp;B group. His parents married in 1964, separated in 1968, and divorced in 1972. His mother later remarried to Curtis Crayon and had three children: sons Jerome and Tyree (both deceased) and daughter Shameka.\nIn 1976, Dre began attending Vanguard Junior High School in Compton, but due to gang violence, he transferred to the safer suburban Roosevelt Junior High School. The family moved often and lived in apartments and houses in Compton, Carson, Long Beach, and the Watts and South Central neighborhoods of Los Angeles. Dre has said that he was mostly raised by his grandmother in the New Wilmington Arms housing project in Compton. His mother later married Warren Griffin, which added three step-sisters and one step-brother to the family; the latter would eventually begin rapping under the name Warren G. Dre is also the cousin of producer Sir Jinx.\nDre attended Centennial High School in Compton during his freshman year in 1979, but transferred to Fremont High School in South Central Los Angeles due to poor grades. He attempted to enroll in an apprenticeship program at Northrop Aviation Company, but was ineligible due to poor grades. Thereafter, he focused on his social life and entertainment for the remainder of his high school years.\nDre's frequent absences from school jeopardized his position as a diver on his school's swim team. After high school, he attended Chester Adult School in Compton following his mother's demands for him to get a job or continue his education. After brief attendance at a radio broadcasting school, he relocated to the residence of his father and residence of his grandparents before returning to his mother's house.\nMusical career.\n1984\u20131986: World Class Wreckin' Cru.\nInspired by the Grandmaster Flash song \"The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of Steel\", Dr. Dre often attended a club called Eve's After Dark to watch many DJs and rappers performing live. He subsequently became a DJ in the club, initially under the name \"Dr. J\", based on the nickname of Julius Erving, his favorite basketball player. At the club, he met aspiring rapper Antoine Carraby, later to become member DJ Yella of N.W.A. Soon afterwards he adopted the moniker Dr.\u00a0Dre, a mix of previous alias Dr. J and his first name, referring to himself as the \"Master of Mixology\".\nEve After Dark had a back room with a small four-track studio where Dre and Yella recorded several demos. In their first recording session, they recorded a song entitled \"Surgery\" in 1984. Dr. Dre's earliest recordings were released in 1994 on a compilation titled \"Concrete Roots\". Critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described the compiled music, released \"several years before Dre developed a distinctive style\", as \"surprisingly generic and unengaging\" and \"for dedicated fans only\".\nDre later joined the musical group World Class Wreckin' Cru, which released its debut album under the Kru-Cut label in 1985. The group would become stars of the electro-hop scene that dominated early-mid 1980s West Coast hip-hop. \"Surgery\", which was officially released after being recorded prior to the group's official formation, would prominently feature Dr.\u00a0Dre on the turntable. The record would become the group's first hit, selling 50,000\u00a0copies within the Compton area. Dr.\u00a0Dre and DJ Yella also performed mixes for local radio station KDAY, boosting ratings for its afternoon rush-hour show \"The Traffic Jam\".\n1986\u20131991: N.W.A and Ruthless Records.\nIn 1986, Dr. Dre met rapper O'Shea Jackson\u2014known as Ice Cube\u2014who collaborated with him to record songs for Ruthless Records, a hip-hop record label run by local rapper Eazy-E. N.W.A and fellow West Coast rapper Ice-T are widely credited as seminal artists of the gangsta rap genre, a profanity-heavy subgenre of hip-hop, replete with gritty depictions of urban crime and gang lifestyle. Not feeling constricted to racially charged political issues pioneered by rap artists such as Public Enemy or Boogie Down Productions, N.W.A favored themes and uncompromising lyrics, offering stark descriptions of violent, inner-city streets. Propelled by the hit \"Fuck tha Police\", the group's first full album \"Straight Outta Compton\" (1989) became a major success, despite an almost complete absence of radio airplay or major concert tours. The Federal Bureau of Investigation sent Ruthless Records a warning letter in response to the song's content.\nAfter Ice Cube left N.W.A in 1989 over financial disputes, Dr. Dre produced and performed for much of the group's second album \"Efil4zaggin\". He also produced tracks for a number of other acts on Ruthless Records, including Eazy-E's 1988 solo debut \"Eazy-Duz-It\", Above the Law's 1990 debut \"Livin' Like Hustlers\", Michel'le's 1989 self-titled debut, the D.O.C.'s 1989 debut \"No One Can Do It Better\", J.J. Fad's 1988 debut \"Supersonic\" and funk rock musician Jimmy Z's 1991 album \"Muzical Madness\".\n1991\u20131996: \"The Chronic\" and Death Row Records.\nAfter a dispute with Eazy-E, Dre left the group at the peak of its popularity in 1991 under the advice of friend, and N.W.A lyricist, the D.O.C. and his bodyguard at the time, Suge Knight. Knight, a notorious strongman and intimidator, was able to have Eazy-E release Young from his contract and, using Dr.\u00a0Dre as his flagship artist, founded Death Row Records. In 1992, Young released his first single, the title track to the film \"Deep Cover\", a collaboration with rapper Snoop Dogg, whom he met through Warren G. Dr.\u00a0Dre's debut solo album was \"The Chronic\", released under Death Row Records with Suge Knight as executive producer. Young ushered in a new style of rap, both in terms of musical style and lyrical content, including introducing a number of artists to the industry including Snoop Dogg, Kurupt, Daz Dillinger, RBX, the Lady of Rage, Nate Dogg and Jewell.\nOn the strength of singles such as \"Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang\", \"Let Me Ride\", and \"Fuck wit Dre Day (and Everybody's Celebratin')\" (known as \"Dre Day\" for radio and television play), all of which featured Snoop Dogg as guest vocalist, \"The Chronic\" became a cultural phenomenon, its G-funk sound dominating much of hip-hop music for the early 1990s. In 1993, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) certified the album triple platinum, and Dr.\u00a0Dre also won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance for his performance on \"Let Me Ride\". For that year, \"Billboard\" magazine also ranked Dr.\u00a0Dre as the eighth-best-selling musical artist, \"The Chronic\" as the sixth-best-selling album, and \"Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang\" as the 11th-best-selling single.\nBesides working on his own material, Dr.\u00a0Dre produced Snoop Dogg's debut album \"Doggystyle\", which became the first debut album for an artist to enter the \"Billboard\" 200 album charts at number one. In 1994 Dr.\u00a0Dre produced some songs on the soundtracks to the films \"Above the Rim\" and \"Murder Was the Case\". He collaborated with fellow N.W.A member Ice Cube for the song \"Natural Born Killaz\" in 1995. For the film \"Friday\", Dre recorded \"Keep Their Heads Ringin'\", which reached number ten on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and number 1 on the Hot Rap Singles (now Hot Rap Tracks) charts.\nIn 1995, Death Row Records signed rapper 2Pac, and began to position him as their major star: he collaborated with Dr. Dre on the commercially successful single \"California Love\", which became both artists' first song to top the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. However, in March 1996 Young left the label amidst a contract dispute and growing concerns that label boss Suge Knight was corrupt, financially dishonest and out of control. Later that year, he formed his own label, Aftermath Entertainment, under the distribution label for Death Row Records, Interscope Records. Subsequently, Death Row Records suffered poor sales by 1997, especially following the death of 2Pac and the racketeering charges brought against Knight.\nDr. Dre also appeared on the single \"No Diggity\" by R&amp;B group Blackstreet in 1996: it too was a sales success, topping the Hot 100 for four consecutive weeks, and later won the award for Best R&amp;B Vocal by a Duo or Group at the 1997 Grammy Awards. After hearing it for the first time, several of Dr. Dre's former Death Row colleagues, including 2Pac, recorded and attempted to release a song titled \"Toss It Up\", containing numerous insults aimed at Dr. Dre and using a deliberately similar instrumental to \"No Diggity\", but were forced to replace the production after Blackstreet sent the label a cease and desist letter stopping them from distributing the song.\n1996\u20132000: Move to Aftermath Entertainment and \"2001\".\nThe \"Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath\" album, released on November 26, 1996, featured songs by Dr.\u00a0Dre himself, as well as by newly signed Aftermath Entertainment artists, and a solo track \"Been There, Done That\", intended as a symbolic farewell to gangsta rap. Despite being certified platinum by the RIAA, the album was not very popular among music fans. In October 1996, Dre performed \"Been There, Done That\" on \"Saturday Night Live\". In 1997, Dr. Dre produced several tracks on the Firm's \"The Album\"; it was met with largely negative reviews from critics. Rumors began to abound that Aftermath was facing financial difficulties. Aftermath Entertainment also faced a trademark infringement lawsuit by the underground thrash metal band Aftermath.\n\"First Round Knock Out\", a compilation of various tracks produced and performed by Dr. Dre, was also released in 1996, with material ranging from World Class Wreckin' Cru to N.W.A to Death Row recordings. Dr. Dre chose to take no part in the ongoing East Coast\u2013West Coast hip-hop rivalry of the time, instead producing for, and appearing on, several New York artists' releases, such as Nas' \"Nas Is Coming\", LL Cool J's \"Zoom\" and Jay-Z's \"Watch Me\".\nThe turning point for Aftermath came in 1998, when Dre's close friend, Jimmy Iovine, the co-founder of Interscope Records (parent label for Aftermath), suggested that Dr. Dre sign Eminem, a white rapper from Detroit. Dre produced three songs and provided vocals for two on Eminem's successful and controversial debut album \"The Slim Shady LP\", released in 1999. The Dr. Dre-produced lead single from that album, \"My Name Is\", brought Eminem to public attention for the first time, and the success of \"The Slim Shady LP\" \u2013 it reached number two on the \"Billboard\" 200 and received general acclaim from critics \u2013 revived the label's commercial ambitions and viability.\nDr.\u00a0Dre's second solo album, \"2001\", released on November 16, 1999, was considered an ostentatious return to his gangsta rap roots. It was initially titled \"The Chronic 2000\" to imply being a sequel to his debut solo effort \"The Chronic\" but was re-titled \"2001\" after Death Row Records released an unrelated compilation album with the title \"\" in May 1999. Other tentative titles included \"The Chronic 2001\" and \"Dr.\u00a0Dre\".\nThe album featured numerous collaborators, including Devin the Dude, Snoop Dogg, Kurupt, Xzibit, Nate Dogg, Eminem, Knoc-turn'al, King T, Defari, Kokane, Mary J. Blige and new prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Hittman, as well as co-production between Dre and new Aftermath producer Mel-Man. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of the website AllMusic described the sound of the album as \"adding ominous strings, soulful vocals, and reggae\" to Dr.\u00a0Dre's style. The album was highly successful, charting at number two on the \"Billboard\" 200 charts and has since been certified six times platinum, validating a recurring theme on the album: Dr.\u00a0Dre was still a force to be reckoned with, despite the lack of major releases in the previous few years. The album included popular hit singles \"Still D.R.E.\" and \"Forgot About Dre\", both of which Dr.\u00a0Dre performed on NBC's \"Saturday Night Live\" on October 23, 1999. Dr.\u00a0Dre won the Grammy Award for Producer of the Year, Non-Classical in 2000, and joined the Up in Smoke Tour with fellow rappers Eminem, Snoop Dogg, and Ice Cube that year as well.\n2000\u20132010: Focus on production and \"Detox\".\nFollowing the success of \"2001\", Dr.\u00a0Dre focused on producing songs and albums for other artists. He co-produced six tracks on Eminem's landmark \"Marshall Mathers LP\", including the Grammy-winning lead single, \"The Real Slim Shady\". The album itself earned a Grammy and proved to be the fastest-selling rap album of all time, moving 1.76\u00a0million units in its first week alone. He produced the single \"Family Affair\" by R&amp;B singer Mary J. Blige for her album \"No More Drama\" in 2001. He also produced \"Let Me Blow Ya Mind\", a duet by rapper Eve and No Doubt lead singer Gwen Stefani and signed R&amp;B singer Truth Hurts to Aftermath in 2001.\nDr. Dre produced and rapped on singer and Interscope labelmate Bilal's 2001 single \"Fast Lane\", which barely missed the Top 40 of the R&amp;B charts. He later assisted in the production of Bilal's second album, \"Love for Sale\", which Interscope controversially shelved because of its creative direction. Dr. Dre was the executive producer of Eminem's 2002 release, \"The Eminem Show\". He produced three songs on the album, one of which was released as a single, and he appeared in the video for \"Without Me\". He also produced the D.O.C.'s 2003 album \"Deuce\", where he made a guest appearance on the tracks \"Psychic Pymp Hotline\", \"Gorilla Pympin'\" and \"Judgment Day\".\nIn 2002, Dr. Dre signed rapper 50 Cent to Aftermath in a joint venture between Interscope and Eminem's Shady Records. Dr. Dre served as executive producer for 50 Cent's commercially successful February 2003 debut studio album \"Get Rich or Die Tryin\"'. Dr. Dre produced or co-produced four tracks on the album, including the hit single \"In da Club\". Eminem's fourth album since joining Aftermath, \"Encore\", again saw Dre taking on the role of executive producer, and this time he was more actively involved in the music, producing or co-producing a total of eight tracks, including three singles.\nDr.\u00a0Dre also produced \"How We Do\", a 2005 hit single from rapper the Game from his album \"The Documentary\", as well as tracks on 50 Cent's successful second album \"The Massacre\". For an issue of \"Rolling Stone\" magazine in April 2005, Dr. Dre was ranked 54th out of 100 artists for \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list \"The Immortals: The Greatest Artists of All Time\". Kanye West wrote the summary for Dr. Dre, where he stated Dr. Dre's song \"Xxplosive\" as where he \"got (his) whole sound from\".\nIn November 2006, Dr.\u00a0Dre began working with Raekwon on his album \"Only Built 4 Cuban Linx II\". He also produced tracks for the rap albums \"Buck the World\" by Young Buck, \"Curtis\" by 50 Cent, \"Tha Blue Carpet Treatment\" by Snoop Dogg, and \"Kingdom Come\" by Jay-Z. Dre also appeared on Timbaland's track \"Bounce\", from his 2007 solo album, \"Timbaland Presents Shock Value\" alongside, Missy Elliott, and Justin Timberlake. During this period, the D.O.C. stated that Dre had been working with him on his fourth album \"Voices through Hot Vessels\", which he planned to release after \"Detox\" arrived.\nPlanned but unreleased albums during Dr.\u00a0Dre's tenure at Aftermath have included a full-length reunion with Snoop Dogg titled \"Breakup to Makeup\", an album with fellow former N.W.A member Ice Cube which was to be titled \"Heltah Skeltah\", an N.W.A reunion album, and a joint album with fellow producer Timbaland titled \"Chairmen of the Board\".\nIn 2007, Dr. Dre's third studio album, formerly known as \"Detox\", was slated to be his final studio album. Work for the upcoming album dates back to 2001, where its first version was called \"the most advanced rap album ever\", by producer Scott Storch. Later that same year, he decided to stop working on the album to focus on producing for other artists, but then changed his mind; the album had initially been set for a fall 2005 release. Producers confirmed to work on the album include DJ Khalil, Nottz, Bernard \"Focus\" Edwards Jr., Hi-Tek, J.R. Rotem, RZA, and Jay-Z. Snoop Dogg claimed that \"Detox\" was finished, according to a June 2008 report by \"Rolling Stone\" magazine.\nAfter another delay based on producing other artists' work, \"Detox\" was then scheduled for a 2010 release, coming after 50 Cent's \"Before I Self Destruct\" and Eminem's \"Relapse\", an album for which Dr. Dre handled the bulk of production duties. In a Dr Pepper commercial that debuted on May 28, 2009, he premiered the first official snippet of \"Detox\". 50 Cent and Eminem asserted in a 2009 interview on BET's \"106 &amp; Park\" that Dr. Dre had around a dozen songs finished for \"Detox\".\nOn December 15, 2008, Dre appeared in the remix of the song \"Set It Off\" by Canadian rapper Kardinal Offishall (also with Pusha T); the remix debuted on DJ Skee's radio show. At the beginning of 2009, Dre produced, and made a guest vocal performance on, the single \"Crack a Bottle\" by Eminem and the single sold a record 418,000 downloads in its first week and reached the top of the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart on the week of February 12, 2009. Along with this single, in 2009 Dr. Dre produced or co-produced 19 of 20 tracks on Eminem's album \"Relapse\". These included other hit singles \"We Made You\", \"Old Time's Sake\", and \"3 a.m.\" (The only track Dre did not produce was the Eminem-produced single \"Beautiful\".).\nOn April 20, 2010, \"Under Pressure\", featuring Jay-Z and co-produced with Scott Storch, was confirmed by Jimmy Iovine and Dr. Dre during an interview at Fenway Park as the album's first single. The song leaked prior to its intended release in an unmixed, unmastered form without a chorus on June 16, 2010; however, critical reaction to the song was lukewarm, and Dr. Dre later announced in an interview that the song, along with any other previously leaked tracks from \"Detox\"s recording process, would not appear on the final version of the album.\nTwo genuine singles \u2013 \"Kush\", a collaboration with Snoop Dogg and fellow rapper Akon, and \"I Need a Doctor\" with Eminem and singer Skylar Grey \u2013 were released in the United States during November 2010 and February 2011 respectively: the latter achieved international chart success, reaching number four on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and later being certified double platinum by the RIAA and the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA). On June 25, 2010, the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers honored Dr. Dre with its Founders Award for inspiring other musicians.\n2010\u20132020: \"The Planets\", hiatus, Coachella, and \"Compton\".\nIn an August 2010 interview, Dr. Dre stated that an instrumental album, \"The Planets\", was in its first stages of production; each song being named after a planet in the Solar System. On September 3, Dr. Dre showed support to longtime prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Eminem, and appeared on his and Jay-Z's Home &amp; Home Tour, performing hit songs such as \"Still D.R.E.\", \"Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang\", and \"Crack a Bottle\", alongside Eminem and another prot\u00e9g\u00e9, 50 Cent. Sporting an \"R.I.P. Proof\" shirt, Dre was honored by Eminem telling Detroit's Comerica Park to do the same. They did so, by chanting \"DEEE-TOX\", to which he replied, \"I'm coming!\"\nOn November 14, 2011, Dre announced that he would be taking a break from music after he finished producing for artists Slim the Mobster and Kendrick Lamar. In this break, he stated that he would \"work on bringing his Beats By Dre to a standard as high as Apple\" and would also spend time with his family. On January 9, 2012, Dre headlined the final nights of the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in April 2012.\nIn June 2014, Marsha Ambrosius stated that she had been working on Detox, but added that the album would be known under another title . In September 2014, Aftermath in-house producer Dawaun Parker confirmed the title change and stated that over 300 beats had been created for the album over the years, but few of them have had vocals recorded over them.\nThe length of time that \"Detox\" had been recorded for, as well as the limited amount of material that had been officially released or leaked from the recording sessions, had given it considerable notoriety within the music industry. Numerous release dates (including the ones mentioned above) had been given for the album over the years since it was first announced, although none of them transpired to be genuine. Several musicians closely affiliated with Dr. Dre, including Snoop Dogg, fellow rappers 50 Cent, the Game and producer DJ Quik, had speculated in interviews that the album will never be released, due to Dr. Dre's business and entrepreneurial ventures having interfered with recording work, as well as causing him to lose motivation to record new material.\nOn August 1, 2015, Dre announced that he would release what would be his final album, titled \"Compton\". It is inspired by the N.W.A biopic, \"Straight Outta Compton\", and is a compilation-style album, featuring a number of frequent collaborators, including Eminem, Snoop Dogg, Kendrick Lamar, Xzibit and the Game, among others. It was initially released on Apple Music on August 7, with a retail version releasing on August 21. In an interview with \"Rolling Stone\", he revealed that he had about 20 to 40 tracks for \"Detox\" but he did not release it because it did not meet his standards. Dre also revealed that he suffers from social anxiety and due to this, remains secluded and out of attention.\nOn February 12, 2016, it was revealed that Apple would create its first original scripted television series for its then-upcoming Apple TV+ streaming service. Titled \"Vital Signs\", it was set to reflect Dre's life. He was also an executive producer on the show before the show's cancellation sometime in September 2018, due to its graphic depictions of drugs, gun violence and sex. In October 2016, Sean Combs brought out Dr. Dre, Snoop Dogg and others on his Bad Boy reunion tour.\nIn 2018, he produced four songs on \"Oxnard\" by Anderson .Paak. He was the executive producer on the album, as so its follow-up, 2019's \"Ventura\".\n2020\u20132023: return to production and Super Bowl halftime show.\nDr. Dre was the executive producer of Eminem's 2020 release, \"Music to Be Murdered By\". He produced four songs on the album. He also produced two songs on the deluxe edition of the album, \"Side B\", and appeared on the song, \"Gunz Blazing\". On September 30, 2021, it was revealed that Dre would perform at the Super Bowl LVI halftime show alongside Eminem, Snoop Dogg, Mary J. Blige, and Kendrick Lamar. \nIn December 2021, an update for the video game, \"Grand Theft Auto Online\", predominantly featured Dre and added some of his previously unreleased tracks which was released as an EP, \"The Contract\", on February 3, 2022. Around this time, Dre announced he was collaborating with Marsha Ambrosius on \"Casablanco\", and with Mary J. Blige on an upcoming album. Later that year, Snoop Dogg announced that he and Dr. Dre are in the process of recording their new album, \"Missionary\". Snoop said the album will be released via Death Row and Aftermath.\nOn February 13, 2022, Dr. Dre performed at the Super Bowl LVI halftime show alongside Eminem, Snoop Dogg, Kendrick Lamar, and Mary J. Blige, with surprise appearances from 50 Cent and Anderson .Paak. The performance was met with critical acclaim and is the first Super Bowl halftime show to win the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety Special (Live). The show also won the Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Production Design for a Variety Special and Outstanding Music Direction. The same year, he produced numerous songs including \"The King and I\", a collaboration between Eminem and CeeLo Green for the 2022 biopic, \"Elvis,\" and a remix of Kanye West's song \"Use This Gospel\" for DJ Khaled's album \"God Did,\" the latter of whom was originally intended for Kanye West and Dr. Dre's joint gospel album, \"Jesus Is King Part II\", which remains unreleased, even though it surfaced online in leaks around September 2023.\nIn September 2022, it was reported that Dr. Dre will compose the original score for the upcoming animated series, \"Death for Hire: The Origin of Tehk City\". The show is created by Ice-T and Arabian Prince; based on the graphic novel of the same title, it features the voice talent of Ice-T, his wife Coco Austin, Snoop Dogg, Busta Rhymes, and Treach among others.\nIn February 2023, Dre and Marsha Ambrosius held a listening party for the \"Casablanco\" album in Los Angeles. The album was released on June 28, 2024, through Aftermath Entertainment and received critical acclaim.\n2024\u2013present: Collaboration with Snoop Dogg.\nIn February 2024, Snoop launched a range of pre-mixed cocktails with Dr. Dre named after their hit single, Gin and Juice. Flavours include Apricot, Citrus, Melon and Passionfruit. A short prohibition themed trailer was created to support the release.\nHe also produced two songs on Eminem's 12th studio album \"The Death of Slim Shady (Coup de Gr\u00e2ce)\" released on July 12, 2024\",\" namely \"Lucifer and Road Rage.\" The album received generally mixed reviews from music critics.\nLater in 2024, Snoop Dogg announced a new album coming out called \"Missionary\", entirely produced by Dr. Dre, serving as a spiritual sequel to Snoop Dogg's first album \"Doggystyle\", which was also produced by Dr. Dre. The album's first single \"Gorgeous\" was released on November 1, 2024, followed by the album's release on December 13, 2024, via Death Row/Aftermath and Interscope, while the latter label serving as its new signee. The album features guest appearances from Eminem, Dr. Dre, 50 Cent, Method Man, and Sting, and received generally favorable reviews with praise directed towards Snoop's lyrics and Dr. Dre's production.\nOther ventures.\nFilm appearances.\nDr. Dre made his first on screen appearance as a weapons dealer in the 1996 bank robbery movie \"Set It Off\". In 2001, Dr.\u00a0Dre also appeared in the movies \"The Wash\" and \"Training Day\". A song of his, \"Bad Intentions\" (featuring Knoc-Turn'Al and produced by Mahogany), was featured on \"The Wash\" soundtrack. Dr.\u00a0Dre also appeared on two other songs \"On the Blvd.\" and \"The Wash\" along with his co-star Snoop Dogg. \nCrucial Films.\nIn February 2007, it was announced that Dr.\u00a0Dre would produce dark comedies and horror films for New Line Cinema-owned company Crucial Films, along with longtime video director Phillip Atwell. Dr.\u00a0Dre announced \"This is a natural switch for me, since I've directed a lot of music videos, and I eventually want to get into directing.\" Along with fellow member Ice Cube, Dr. Dre produced \"Straight Outta Compton\" (2015), a biographical film about N.W.A.\nEntrepreneurship.\nBeats Electronics.\nIn 2006, Dre co-founded Beats Electronics with his partner, Jimmy Iovine. Its first brand of headphones were launched in July 2008. The line consisted of Beats Studio, a circumaural headphone; Beats Tour, an in-ear headphone; Beats Solo &amp; Solo HD, a supra-aural headphone; Beats Spin; Heartbeats by Lady Gaga, also an in-ear headphone; and Diddy Beats. In late 2009, Hewlett-Packard participated in a deal to bundle Beats By Dr. Dre with some HP laptops and headsets. HP and Dr. Dre announced the deal on October 9, 2009, at a press event. An exclusive laptop, known as the HP ENVY 15 Beats limited edition, was released for sale October 22. In January 2014, Beats Music was introduced and launched as a streaming service. Then, in May, technology giant Apple purchased the Beats brand for $3.4 billion. The deal made Dr. Dre the \"richest man in hip-hop\". Dr. Dre became an Apple employee in an executive role, and worked with Apple for years. As of 2022, it was found that Apple had subtracted $200 million from the deal after entertainer Tyrese Gibson revealed the news of the acquisition on social media a month before it was completed without the company's permission.\nPhilanthropy.\nDuring May 2013, Dr. Dre and Jimmy Iovine donated a $70-million endowment to the University of Southern California to create the USC Jimmy Iovine and Andre Young Academy for Arts, Technology and the Business of Innovation. The goal of the academy has been stated as \"to shape the future by nurturing the talents, passions, leadership and risk-taking of uniquely qualified students who are motivated to explore and create new art forms, technologies, and business models.\" The first class of the academy began in September 2014.\nIn June 2017, it was announced that Dr. Dre had committed $10 million to the construction of a performing arts center for the new Compton High School. The center will encompass creative resources and a 1,200-seat theater, and is expected to break ground in 2020. The project is a partnership between Dr. Dre and the Compton Unified School District.\nCommercial endorsements.\nIn 2002 and 2003, Dr. Dre appeared in TV commercials for Coors Light beer.\nBeginning in 2009, Dr. Dre appeared in TV commercials that also featured his Beats Electronics product line. A 2009 commercial for the Dr Pepper soft drink had Dr. Dre DJing with Beats headphones and playing a brief snippet off the never-released \"Detox\" album. In 2010, Dr. Dre had a cameo in a commercial for HP laptops that featured a plug for Beats Audio. Then in 2011, the Chrysler 300S \"Imported from Detroit\" ad campaign had a commercial narrated by Dr. Dre and including a plug for Beats Audio.\nDr. Dre started Burning Man rumors.\nAn urban legend surfaced in 2011 when a Tumblr blog titled Dr. Dre Started Burning Man began promulgating the notion that the producer, rapper and entrepreneur had discovered Burning Man in 1995 during a music video shoot and offered to cover the cost of the event's permit from the Nevada Bureau of Land Management under an agreement with the festival's organizers that he could institute an entrance fee system, which had not existed before his participation. This claim was supported by an alleged letter from Dre to Nicole Threatt Young that indicated that Dre had shared his experience witnessing the Burning Man festival with her.\n\"Business Insider\" mentions the portion of the letter where Dr. Dre purportedly states \"someone should get behind this\u00a0... and make some money off these fools\" and compares Dr. Dre's potential entrepreneurial engagement with Burning Man as a parallel to Steve Jobs's efforts to centralize and profit from the otherwise unorganized online music industry. According to \"Salon\", Dr. Dre's ethos seems to be aligned with seven of the ten principles of the Burning Man community: \"radical self-reliance, radical self-expression, communal effort, civic responsibility, leaving no trace, participation and immediacy.\"\nMusical influences and style.\nProduction style.\nDre is noted for his evolving production style, while always keeping in touch with his early musical sound and re-shaping elements from previous work. At the beginning of his career as a producer for the World Class Wreckin Cru with DJ Alonzo Williams in the mid-1980s, his music was in the electro-hop style pioneered by the Unknown DJ, and that of early hip-hop groups like the Beastie Boys and Whodini.\nFrom \"Straight Outta Compton\" on, Dre uses live musicians to replay old melodies rather than sampling them. With Ruthless Records, collaborators included guitarist Mike \"Crazy Neck\" Sims, multi-instrumentalist Colin Wolfe, DJ Yella and sound engineer Donovan \"The Dirt Biker\" Sound. Dre is receptive of new ideas from other producers, one example being his fruitful collaboration with Above the Law's producer Cold 187um while at Ruthless. Cold 187\u00a0um was at the time experimenting with 1970s P-Funk samples (Parliament, Funkadelic, Bootsy Collins, George Clinton etc.), that Dre also used. Dre has since been accused of \"stealing\" the concept of G-funk from Cold 187\u00a0um.\nUpon leaving Ruthless and forming Death Row Records in 1991, Dre called on veteran West Coast DJ Chris \"the Glove\" Taylor and sound engineer Greg \"Gregski\" Royal, along with Colin Wolfe, to help him on future projects. His 1992 album \"The Chronic\" is thought to be one of the most well-produced hip-hop albums of all time. Musical themes included hard-hitting synthesizer solos played by Wolfe, bass-heavy compositions, background female vocals and Dre fully embracing 1970s funk samples. Dre used a minimoog synth to replay the melody from Leon Haywood's 1972 song \"I Wanna Do Somethin' Freaky to You\" for the Chronic's first single \"Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang\" which became a global hit. For his new prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Snoop Doggy Dogg's album \"Doggystyle\", Dre collaborated with then 19-year-old producer Daz Dillinger, who received co-production credits on songs \"Serial Killa\" and \"For all My Niggaz &amp; Bitches\", The Dramatics bass player Tony \"T. Money\" Green, guitarist Ricky Rouse, keyboardists Emanuel \"Porkchop\" Dean and Sean \"Barney Rubble\" Thomas and engineer Tommy Daugherty, as well as Warren G and Sam Sneed, who are credited with bringing several samples to the studio.\nThe influence of \"The Chronic\" and \"Doggystyle\" on the popular music of the 1990s went not only far beyond the West Coast, but beyond hip-hop as a genre. Artists as diverse as Master P (\"Bout It, Bout It\"), George Michael (\"Fastlove\"), Mariah Carey (\"Fantasy\"), Adina Howard (\"Freak Like Me\"), Luis Miguel (\"Dame\"), and The Spice Girls (\"Say You'll Be There\") used G-funk instrumentation in their songs. Bad Boy Records producer Chucky Thompson stated in the April 2004 issue of \"XXL\" magazine that the sound of \"Doggystyle\" and \"The Chronic\" was the basis for the Notorious B.I.G.'s 1995 hit single \"Big Poppa\":\nIn 1994, starting with the \"Murder was the Case\" soundtrack, Dre attempted to push the boundaries of G-funk further into a darker sound. In songs such as \"Murder was the Case\" and \"Natural Born Killaz\", the synthesizer pitch is higher and the drum tempo is slowed down to 91 BPM (87 BPM in the remix) to create a dark and gritty atmosphere. Percussion instruments, particularly sleigh bells, are also present. Dre's frequent collaborators from this period included Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania natives Stuart \"Stu-B-Doo\" Bullard, a multi-instrumentalist from the Ozanam Strings Orchestra, Sam Sneed, Stephen \"Bud'da\" Anderson, and percussionist Carl \"Butch\" Small. This style of production has been influential far beyond the West Coast. The beat for the Houston-based group Geto Boys 1996 song \"Still\" follows the same drum pattern as \"Natural Born Killaz\" and Eazy E's \"Wut Would U Do\" (a diss to Dre) is similar to the original \"Murder was the Case\" instrumental. This style of production is usually accompanied by horror and occult-themed lyrics and imagery, being crucial to the creation of horrorcore.\nBy 1996, Dre was again looking to innovate his sound. He recruited keyboardist Camara Kambon to play the keys on \"Been There, Done That\", and through Bud'da and Sam Sneed he was introduced to fellow Pittsburgh native Melvin \"Mel-Man\" Bradford. At this time, he also switched from using the E-mu SP-1200 to the Akai MPC3000 drum kit and sampler, which he still uses today. Beginning with his 1996 compilation Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath, Dre's production has taken a less sample-based approach, with loud, layered snare drums dominating the mix, while synthesizers are still omnipresent. In his critically acclaimed second album, 2001, live instrumentation takes the place of sampling, a famous example being \"The Next Episode\", in which keyboardist Camara Kambon re-played live the main melody from David McCallum's 1967 jazz-funk work \"The Edge\". For every song on \"2001\", Dre had a keyboardist, guitarist and bassist create the basic parts of the beat, while he himself programmed the drums, did the sequencing and overdubbing and added sound effects, and later mixed the songs. During this period, Dre's signature \"west coast whistle\" riffs are still present albeit in a lower pitch, as in \"Light Speed\", \"Housewife\", \"Some L.A. Niggaz\" and Eminem's \"Guilty Conscience\" hook. The sound of \"2001\" had tremendous influence on hip-hop production, redefining the West Coast's sound and expanding the G-funk of the early 1990s. To produce the album, Dre and Mel-Man relied on the talents of Scott Storch and Camara Kambon on the keys, Mike Elizondo and Colin Wolfe on bass guitar, Sean Cruse on lead guitar and sound engineers Richard \"Segal\" Huredia and Mauricio \"Veto\" Iragorri.\nFrom the mid-2000s, Dr. Dre has taken on a more soulful production style, using more of a classical piano instead of a keyboard, and having claps replace snares, as evidenced in songs such as Snoop Dogg's \"Imagine\" and \"Boss' Life\", Busta Rhymes' \"Get You Some\" and \"Been Through the Storm\", Stat Quo's \"Get Low\" and \"The Way It Be\", Jay-Z's \"Lost One\", Nas' \"Hustlers\", and several beats on Eminem's Relapse album. Soul and R&amp;B pianist Mark Batson, having previously worked with The Dave Matthews Band, Seal and Maroon 5 has been credited as the architect of this sound. Besides Batson, Aftermath producer and understudy of Dre's, Dawaun Parker, who has named Q-Tip and J Dilla as his primary influences, is thought to be responsible for giving Dre's newest beats an East Coast feel.\nDespite an occasional hint of trap about the beats and an intriguingly warped use of autotune in his \"Compton\" song, \"Darkside/Gone\", his production seems to stand slightly apart from current trends in hip-hop like Eminem's song \"Little Engine\" with an ominous horrorcore beat \u2014 reminiscent of some of his works on Eminem's album Relapse \u2013 or the West Coast joint Lock It Up.\nProduction equipment.\nDr.\u00a0Dre has said that his primary instrument in the studio is the Akai MPC3000, a drum machine and sampler, and that he often uses as many as four or five to produce a single recording. He cites 1970s funk musicians such as George Clinton, Isaac Hayes and Curtis Mayfield as his primary musical influences. Unlike most rap producers, he tries to avoid samples as much as possible, preferring to have studio musicians re-play pieces of music he wants to use, because it allows him more flexibility to change the pieces in rhythm and tempo. In 2001 he told \"Time\" magazine, \"I may hear something I like on an old record that may inspire me, but I'd rather use musicians to re-create the sound or elaborate on it. I can control it better.\"\nOther equipment he uses includes the E-mu SP-1200 drum machine and other keyboards from such manufacturers as Korg, Rhodes, Wurlitzer, Moog, and Roland. Dr. Dre also stresses the importance of equalizing drums properly, telling \"Scratch\" in 2004 that he \"used the same drum sounds on a couple of different songs on one album before but you'd never be able to tell the difference because of the EQ\". Dr. Dre also uses the digital audio workstation Pro Tools and uses the software to combine hardware drum machines and vintage analog keyboards and synthesizers.\nAfter founding Aftermath Entertainment in 1996, Dr.\u00a0Dre took on producer Mel-Man as a co-producer, and his music took on a more synthesizer-based sound, using fewer vocal samples (as he had used on \"Lil' Ghetto Boy\" and \"Let Me Ride\" on \"The Chronic\", for example). Mel-Man has not shared co-production credits with Dr.\u00a0Dre since approximately 2002, but fellow Aftermath producer Focus has credited Mel-Man as a key architect of the signature Aftermath sound.\nIn 1999, Dr.\u00a0Dre started working with Mike Elizondo, a bassist, guitarist, and keyboardist who has also produced, written and played on records for female singers such as Poe, Fiona Apple and Alanis Morissette, In the past few years Elizondo has since worked for many of Dr.\u00a0Dre's productions. Dr.\u00a0Dre also told \"Scratch\" magazine in a 2004 interview that he has been studying piano and music theory formally, and that a major goal is to accumulate enough musical theory to score movies. In the same interview he stated that he has collaborated with famed 1960s songwriter Burt Bacharach by sending him hip-hop beats to play over, and hopes to have an in-person collaboration with him in the future.\nWork ethic.\nDr.\u00a0Dre has stated that he is a perfectionist and is known to pressure the artists with whom he records to give flawless performances. In 2006, Snoop Dogg told the website Dubcnn.com that Dr.\u00a0Dre had made new artist Bishop Lamont re-record a single bar of vocals 107\u00a0times. Dr.\u00a0Dre has also stated that Eminem is a fellow perfectionist, and attributes his success on Aftermath to his similar work ethic. He gives a lot of input into the delivery of the vocals and will stop an MC during a take if it is not to his liking. However, he gives MCs that he works with room to write lyrics without too much instruction unless it is a specifically conceptual record, as noted by Bishop Lamont in the book \"How to Rap\".\nA consequence of his perfectionism is that some artists who initially sign deals with Dr.\u00a0Dre's Aftermath label never release albums. In 2001, Aftermath released the soundtrack to the movie \"The Wash\", featuring a number of Aftermath acts such as Shaunta, Daks, Joe Beast and Toi. To date, none have released full-length albums on Aftermath and have apparently ended their relationships with the label and Dr.\u00a0Dre. Other noteworthy acts to leave Aftermath without releasing albums include King Tee, \"2001\" vocalist Hittman, Joell Ortiz, Raekwon and Rakim.\nCollaborators and co-producers.\nOver the years, word of other collaborators who have contributed to Dr.\u00a0Dre's work has surfaced. During his tenure at Death Row Records, it was alleged that Dr.\u00a0Dre's stepbrother Warren G and Tha Dogg Pound member Daz made many uncredited contributions to songs on his solo album \"The Chronic\" and Snoop Doggy Dogg's album \"Doggystyle\" (Daz received production credits on Snoop's similar-sounding, albeit less successful album \"Tha Doggfather\" after Young left Death Row Records).\nIt is known that Scott Storch, who has since gone on to become a successful producer in his own right, contributed to Dr.\u00a0Dre's second album \"2001\"; Storch is credited as a songwriter on several songs and played keyboards on several tracks. In 2006 he told \"Rolling Stone\":\nCurrent collaborator Mike Elizondo, when speaking about his work with Young, describes their recording process as a collaborative effort involving several musicians. In 2004 he claimed to \"Songwriter Universe\" magazine that he had written the foundations of the hit Eminem song \"The Real Slim Shady\", stating, \"I initially played a bass line on the song, and Dr.\u00a0Dre, Tommy Coster Jr. and I built the track from there. Eminem then heard the track, and he wrote the rap to it.\" This account is essentially confirmed by Eminem in his book \"Angry Blonde\", stating that the tune for the song was composed by a studio bassist and keyboardist while Dr.\u00a0Dre was out of the studio but Young later programmed the song's beat after returning.\nA group of disgruntled former associates of Dr.\u00a0Dre complained that they had not received their full due for work on the label in the September 2003 issue of \"The Source\". A producer named Neff-U claimed to have produced the songs \"Say What You Say\" and \"My Dad's Gone Crazy\" on \"The Eminem Show\", the songs \"If I Can't\" and \"Back Down\" on 50 Cent's \"Get Rich or Die Tryin\"', and the beat featured on Dr.\u00a0Dre's commercial for Coors beer.\nAlthough Young studies piano and music theory, he serves as more of a conductor than a musician himself, as Josh Tyrangiel of \"Time\" magazine has noted:\nAlthough Snoop Dogg retains working relationships with Warren G and Daz, who are alleged to be uncredited contributors on the hit albums \"The Chronic\" and \"Doggystyle\", he states that Dr.\u00a0Dre is capable of making beats without the help of collaborators, and that he is responsible for the success of his numerous albums. Dr.\u00a0Dre's prominent studio collaborators, including Scott Storch, Elizondo, Mark Batson and Dawaun Parker, have shared co-writing, instrumental, and more recently co-production credits on the songs where he is credited as the producer.\nAnderson .Paak also praised Dr. Dre in a 2016 interview with \"Music Times\", telling the publication that it was a dream come true to work with Dre.\nGhostwriters.\nIt is acknowledged that most of Dr.\u00a0Dre's raps are written for him by others, though he retains ultimate control over his lyrics and the themes of his songs. As Aftermath producer Mahogany told \"Scratch\": \"It's like a class room in [the booth]. He'll have three writers in there. They'll bring in something, he'll recite it, then he'll say, 'Change this line, change this word,' like he's grading papers.\"\nAs seen in the credits for tracks Young has appeared on, there are often multiple people who contribute to his songs (although often in hip-hop many people are officially credited as a writer for a song, even the producer).\nIn the book \"How to Rap\", RBX explains that writing \"The Chronic\" was a \"team effort\" and details how he ghostwrote \"Let Me Ride\" for Dre. In regard to ghostwriting lyrics he says, \"Dre doesn't profess to be no super-duper rap dude \u2013 Dre is a super-duper producer\". As a member of N.W.A, the D.O.C. wrote lyrics for him while he stuck with producing. Jay-Z ghostwrote lyrics for the single \"Still D.R.E.\" from Dr.\u00a0Dre's album \"2001\".\nPersonal life.\nOn December 15, 1981, when Dre was 16 years old and his then-girlfriend Cassandra Joy Greene was 15 years old, the two had a son named Curtis, who was brought up by Greene and first met Dre 20 years later. Curtis performed as a rapper under the name Hood Surgeon.\n Dre and Lisa Johnson had a daughter named La Tanya Danielle Young. Dre and Johnson have three daughters together.\nIn 1988, Dre and Jenita Porter had a son named Andre Young Jr. In 1990, Porter sued Dre, seeking $5,000 of child support per month. On August 23, 2008, Andre died at the age of 20 from an overdose of heroin and morphine at his mother's Woodland Hills home.\nFrom 1987 to 1996, Dre dated singer Michel'le, who frequently contributed vocals to Ruthless Records and Death Row Records albums. In 1991, they had a son named Marcel.\nIn April 1992, after a verbal dispute with his engineer, Dre was consequently shot four times in his leg.\nOn May 25, 1996, Dre married Nicole (n\u00e9e Plotzker) Threatt, who was previously married to basketball player Sedale Threatt. They have two children together: a son named Truice (born 1997) and a daughter named Truly (born 2001).\nIn 2001, Dre earned a total of about US$52\u00a0million from selling part of his share of Aftermath Entertainment to Interscope Records and his production of such hit songs that year as \"Family Affair\" by Mary J. Blige. \"Rolling Stone\" magazine thus named him the second highest-paid artist of the year. Dr.\u00a0Dre was ranked 44th in 2004 from earnings of $11.4\u00a0million, primarily from production royalties from such projects as albums from G-Unit and D12 and the single \"Rich Girl\" by singer Gwen Stefani and rapper Eve. \"Forbes\" estimated his net worth at US$270 million in 2012. The same publication later reported that he acquired US$110\u00a0million via his various endeavors in 2012, making him the highest\u2013paid artist of the year. Income from the 2014 sale of Beats to Apple, contributing to what \"Forbes\" termed \"the biggest single-year payday of any musician in history\", made Dr. Dre the world's richest musical performer of 2015. He remains one of the wealthiest musical artists.\nIn 2014, Dre purchased a $40 million home in the Brentwood neighborhood of Los Angeles from its previous owners, NFL player Tom Brady and supermodel Gisele B\u00fcndchen.\nIt was reported that Dre suffered a brain aneurysm on January 5, 2021, and that he was admitted to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center's ICU in Los Angeles, California. Hours after his admission to the hospital, Dre's home was targeted for an attempted burglary. He eventually received support from LeBron James, Martin Lawrence, LL Cool J, Missy Elliott, Snoop Dogg, Eminem, Ice Cube, 50 Cent, Ellen DeGeneres, Ciara, her husband Russell Wilson, T.I., Quincy Jones and others. In February, he was released with a following message on Instagram: \"Thanks to my family, friends and fans for their interest and well wishes. I'm doing great and getting excellent care from my medical team. I will be out of the hospital and back home soon. Shout out to all the great medical professionals at Cedars. One Love!!\" In March 2024, Dre revealed that during his hospitalization following the brain aneurysm, he also suffered three strokes.\nIn December 2021, Dre finalized his divorce from Nicole Threatt for a reported sum of $100 million of his estate.\nDre is a fan of both the Los Angeles Rams of the NFL, and the Los Angeles Lakers of the NBA.\nControversies and legal issues.\nViolence against women.\nDre has been accused of multiple incidents of violence against women.\nOn January 27, 1991, at a music industry party at the Po Na Na Souk club in Hollywood, Dr. Dre assaulted television host Dee Barnes of the Fox television program \"Pump it Up!\", following an episode of the show. Barnes had interviewed NWA, which was followed by an interview with Ice Cube in which Cube mocked NWA. Barnes filed a $22.7 million lawsuit in response to the incident. Subsequently, Dr. Dre was fined $2,500, given two years' probation, ordered to undergo 240 hours of community service, and given a spot on an anti-violence public service announcement on television. The civil suit was settled out of court. Barnes stated that he \"began slamming her face and the right side of her body repeatedly against a wall near the stairway\". Dr. Dre later commented: \"People talk all this shit, but you know, somebody fucks with me, I'm gonna fuck with them. I just did it, you know. Ain't nothing you can do now by talking about it. Besides, it ain't no big thing \u2013 I just threw her through a door.\"\nIn March 2015, Michel'le, the mother of one of Dre's children, accused him of subjecting her to domestic violence during their time together as a couple, but did not initiate legal action. Their abusive relationship is portrayed in her 2016 biopic \"\". Dre threatened a lawsuit against Lifetime, Sony Pictures and filmmakers of \"Surviving Compton\" in a cease and desist letter, but never ultimately took action.\nInterviewed by Ben Westhoff for the book \"Original Gangstas: the Untold Story of Dr Dre, Eazy-E, Ice Cube, Tupac Shakur, and the Birth of West Coast Rap\", Lisa Johnson stated that Dre beat her many times, including while she was pregnant. She was granted a restraining order against him.\nFormer labelmate Tairrie B claimed that Dre assaulted her at a post-Grammy party in 1990, in response to her track \"Ruthless Bitch\".\nDuring press for the 2015 film \"Straight Outta Compton\", questions about the portrayal and behavior of Dre and other prominent figures in the rap community about violence against women \u2013 and the question about its absence in the film \u2013 were raised. The discussion about the film led to Dre addressing his past behavior in the press. In August 2015, in an interview with \"Rolling Stone\", Dre lamented his abusive past, saying, \"I made some fucking horrible mistakes in my life. I was young, fucking stupid. I would say all the allegations aren't true\u2014some of them are. Those are some of the things that I would like to take back. It was really fucked up. But I paid for those mistakes, and there's no way in hell that I will ever make another mistake like that again.\"\nIn a statement to \"The New York Times\" on August 21, 2015, exactly two weeks after his album, \"Compton\", was released, Dre again addressed his abusive past, stating, \"25 years ago I was a young man drinking too much and in over my head with no real structure in my life. However, none of this is an excuse for what I did. I've been married for 19 years and every day I'm working to be a better man for my family, seeking guidance along the way. I'm doing everything I can so I never resemble that man again.\u00a0... I apologize to the women I've hurt. I deeply regret what I did and know that it has forever impacted all of our lives.\"\nIn the 2017 film \"The Defiant Ones\", Dr. Dre explained about the Dee Barnes incident again, \"This was a very low point in my life. I've done a lot of stupid shit in my life. A lot of things I wish I could go and take back. I've experienced abuse. I've watched my mother get abused. So there's absolutely no excuse for it. No woman should ever be treated that way. Any man that puts his hands on a female is a fucking idiot. He's out of his fucking mind, and I was out of my fucking mind at the time. I fucked up, I paid for it, I'm sorry for it, and I apologize for it. I have this dark cloud that follows me, and it's going to be attached to me forever. It's a major blemish on who I am as a man.\"\nSecond divorce.\nDre's wife, Nicole Plotzker-Young, filed for divorce in June 2020, citing irreconcilable differences. In November 2020, she filed legal claims that Dre engaged in verbal violence and infidelity during their marriage. She also stated that he tore up their prenuptial agreement that he wanted her to sign out of anger. Dre's representative responded, calling her claims of infidelity and violence in their marriage \"false\".\nBefore being released from the Cedar-Sinai Medical Center, he was ordered to pay Plotzker-Young $2 million in temporary spousal support. Between the spring and summer of the year, Dre was ordered by the Los Angeles County judge to pay his ex-wife over $300,000 a month in spousal support. The $2 million extension request was also dismissed, due to insufficient claims.\nIn July 2021, Dr. Dre was ordered by the Los Angeles Superior Court Judge to pay an additional $293,306 a month to his estranged wife in spousal support starting August 1 until she decides to remarry or \"further order of the Court\". Then, in August, the judge denied his wife's request for a protective order, due to her being afraid of Dre after a snippet leaked on Instagram of him rapping about the divorce proceedings and his possible brain aneurysm earlier that February; in this snippet, he called his wife a \"greedy bitch\".\nIn mid-October, Dr. Dre was served more divorce papers, during his grandmother's funeral. That same month, Dre was officially deemed \"single\" by the judge. The financial owings in this case included expenses of Dre's Malibu, Palisades and Hollywood Hills homes, but not his stock in past ownership of Beats Electronics, prior to its sale to Apple in 2014. In December 2021, the divorce proceedings entered their final stages. On December 28, the divorce was settled with Dre keeping most of his assets and income due to the prenuptial agreement, although he would have to pay a 9-figure settlement within one year.\nIn October 2024, Dr. Dre was hit with a $10 million lawsuit by a psychiatrist who had served as Dre's marriage counselor during his marriage and divorce. The counselor alleged that Dre sent a \"barrage\" of threatening, harassing, and intimidatory messages, including homophobic rhetoric, to his counselor.\nCopyright lawsuits.\nDuring the course of \"2001\"s popularity, Dr.\u00a0Dre was involved in several lawsuits. Lucasfilm Ltd., the film company behind the Star Wars film franchise, sued him over the use of the THX-trademarked \"Deep Note\". The Fatback Band also sued Dr.\u00a0Dre over alleged infringement regarding its song \"Backstrokin'\" in his song \"Let's Get High\" from the \"2001\" album; Dr.\u00a0Dre was ordered to pay $1.5\u00a0million to the band in 2003. French jazz musician Jacques Loussier sued Aftermath for $10 million in March 2002, claiming that the Dr.\u00a0Dre-produced Eminem track \"Kill You\" plagiarized his composition \"Pulsion\". The online music file-sharing company Napster also settled a lawsuit with him and metal band Metallica in mid-2001, agreeing to block access to certain files that artists do not want to have shared on the network.\nAnother copyright-related lawsuit hit Dr.\u00a0Dre in the fall of 2002, when Sa Re Ga Ma, a film and music company based in Calcutta, India, sued Aftermath Entertainment over an uncredited sample of the Lata Mangeshkar song \"Thoda Resham Lagta Hai\" on the Aftermath-produced song \"Addictive\" by singer Truth Hurts. In February 2003, a judge ruled that Aftermath would have to halt sales of Truth Hurts' album \"Truthfully Speaking\" if the company would not credit Mangeshkar.\nOther.\nOn June 28, 1992, hours before midnight, a barbecue grill and an overfill of charcoal caused Dre's Calabasas mansion to set on fire. Two firefighters were treated in the hospital for minor injuries. The fire caused over $125,000 in home damages.\nDre pleaded guilty in October 1992 in a case of battery of a police officer and was convicted on two additional battery counts stemming from a brawl in the lobby of the New Orleans hotel in May 1991.\nIn 1993, he was convicted of battery after an altercation with a man who stood outside the front porch of his Woodland Hills home in front of the musician's girlfriend. He claimed that Dre broke his jaw as a result.\nOn January 10, 1994, Dre was arrested after leading police on a 90\u00a0mph pursuit through Beverly Hills in his 1987 Ferrari. It was revealed that Dr. Dre had a blood alcohol of 0.16, twice the state of California's legal limit. The conviction violated the conditions of parole following Dre's battery conviction in 1993; he pleaded no contest and was sentenced to eight months in prison in September 1994. He was ordered to pay a $1,053 fine and attend an alcohol education program.\nIn November 2004, at the \"Vibe\" magazine awards show in Los Angeles, Dr.\u00a0Dre was attacked by a fan named Jimmy James Johnson, who was supposedly asking for an autograph. In the resulting scuffle, then-G-Unit rapper Young Buck stabbed the man. Johnson claimed that Suge Knight, president of Death Row Records, paid him $5,000 to assault Dre in order to humiliate him before he received his Lifetime Achievement Award. Knight immediately went on CBS's \"The Late Late Show\" to deny involvement and insisted that he supported Dr. Dre and wanted Johnson charged. In September 2005, Johnson was sentenced to a year in prison and ordered to stay away from Dr.\u00a0Dre until 2008.\nOn October 30, 2015, Ruthless co-founder Jerry Heller filed suit against Dre, Ice Cube, Eazy-E's widow, Tomica Woods-Wright, director F. Gary Gray and Universal Pictures for defamation of character and copyright infringement over the biopic, \"Straight Outta Compton\". The lawsuit states that depictions of Heller in the film, portrayed by Paul Giamatti, were wrongfully taken from an autobiography he wrote about his involvement with Ruthless and N.W.A. The case was taken to court in June 2016 where a judge criticized the filing, saying that the film was \"approved to portray these facts in \"colorful and hyperbolic\" terms\". On September 2, 2016, Jerry Heller died of a car accident, preceded by a heart attack. However, his lawsuit kept on through his legal team and members of his estate. In October 2018, the lawsuit was dropped, costing Heller's estate $35 million for punitive and $75 million for compensatory damages.\nOn April 4, 2016, TMZ and the \"New York Daily News\" reported that Suge Knight had accused Dre and the Los Angeles Sheriff's Department of a kill-for-hire plot in the 2014 shooting of Knight in club 1 OAK. Three months later, in July, Dre was reportedly detained by police after confronting a next-door neighbor in Malibu about a test drive. It was also alleged that he brandished a handgun on the neighbor, but no evidence would be linked and Dre was soon released.\nOn May 8, 2018, Dre lost a name trademark filing to a Pennsylvania gynecologist named Draion Burch, who previously filed a trademark petition in 2015 to use his nickname, Dr. Drai. Then, on June 26, Dre and Jimmy Iovine were ordered to pay $25 million to former partner and creative designer Steven Lamar, who sued the two co-founders for $100 million in unpaid royalties for designing the early Beats headphone models. The lawsuit was filed in 2015 after news broke out of Apple's acquisition of the headphone brand a year prior.\nIn August 2021, Dr. Dre's oldest daughter LaTanya Young spoke out about being homeless and unable to support her four children. She is currently working for UberEats and DoorDash, and she also works at warehouse jobs. She is living in debt in her SUV while her children are living with friends. Dr. Dre has allegedly stopped supporting LaTanya financially since January 2020 because she has \"spoken about him in the press\".\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nEPs\nCollaborative albums\nAwards and nominations.\nIn March 2024, Dr. Dre received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6840 Hollywood Boulevard.\nGrammy Awards.\nDr. Dre has won eight Grammy Awards. Four of them are for his production work."}
{"id": "8084", "revid": "149211", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8084", "title": "Tech bubble", "text": ""}
{"id": "8085", "revid": "47519242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8085", "title": "Delicate Arch", "text": "Delicate Arch is a freestanding natural arch located in Arches National Park, near Moab in Grand County, Utah, United States. The arch is the most widely recognized landmark in Arches National Park and is depicted on Utah license plates and a postage stamp commemorating Utah's centennial anniversary of admission to the Union in 1896. The Olympic torch relay for the 2002 Winter Olympics passed through the arch.\nHistory.\nBecause of its distinctive shape, the arch was known as \"the Chaps\" and \"the Schoolmarm's Bloomers\" by local cowboys. Many other names have been applied to this arch including \"Bloomers Arch\", \"Marys Bloomers\", \"Old Maids Bloomers\", \"Pants Crotch\", \"Salt Wash Arch\", and \"School Marms Pants\". The arch was given its current name by Frank Beckwith, leader of the Arches National Monument Scientific Expedition, who explored the area in the winter of 1933\u20131934. Although there is a rumor that the names of Delicate Arch and Landscape Arch were inadvertently exchanged due to a signage mixup by the National Park Service (NPS), this is false.\nThis arch played no part in the original designation of the area as a national monument (Arches National Monument) in 1929 and was not included within the original boundaries; it was added when the monument was enlarged in 1938.\nIn the 1950s, the NPS investigated the possibility of applying a clear plastic coating to the arch to protect it from further erosion and eventual destruction. The idea was ultimately abandoned as impractical and contrary to NPS principles.\nNature photographer Michael Fatali started a fire under the arch in September 2000 to demonstrate nighttime photography techniques to a group of amateur photographers. The fire discolored portions of the sandstone near the arch. Fatali was placed on probation and fined $10,900 in restitution to the NPS for the cost of cleanup efforts.\nIn 2017, the United Utah Party was founded, and chose Delicate Arch as its official party logo.\nGeology.\nDelicate Arch is formed of Entrada Sandstone. The original sandstone fin was gradually worn away by weathering and erosion, leaving the arch. Other arches in the park were formed the same way but, due to placement and less dramatic shape, are not as famous.\nEcology.\nDuring the summer, white-throated swifts (\"Aeronautes saxatalis\") nest in the top of the arch.\nClimbing.\nIn May 2006, climber Dean Potter performed as many as six free solo ascents of the arch. Climbing Delicate Arch was not explicitly forbidden under the rules in force at the time, which only stated that routes \"may be closed\" on any named arch; however, most climbers accepted that the named arch formations should not be climbed. The NPS has since closed the loophole by disallowing climbs on any named arch within the park year-round. Slacklining and the placement of new fixed anchors on new climbs are also prohibited.\nControversy ensued when photographs taken after Potter's climb appeared to show damage caused by a climbing technique called top roping. Potter stated on several occasions that he never damaged the arch, and no photos exist of Potter using a top rope setup on the arch. Previous climbers may have top-roped the arch, leaving the existing rope scars. Potter did admit to using a counterweighted rope over the top of the arch, within a natural groove, as well as four cams in a horizontal crack of harder rock at the summit. He used the rope and cams for protection while rehearsing his free solo route and to rappel back down after the free solos. Two fellow climbers also ascended via fixed ropes, one of whom recorded video of Potter from the top.\nTourism.\nDelicate Arch is one of the main tourist draws in Arches National Park. The parking lot at the Delicate Arch Trailhead, although large, fills up quickly on most days. The trail to Delicate Arch is 3 miles (4.8 kilometer) round trip with an elevation change of 480 feet (146 meters). The trail is well defined for the first 1/2 mile, then does a steep incline over open rock. There is a narrow ledge for the last 200 yards (183 meter) before reaching the arch."}
{"id": "8086", "revid": "45310614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8086", "title": "Deed poll", "text": "A deed poll (plural: deeds poll) is a legal document binding on a single person or several persons acting jointly to express an intention or create an obligation. It is a deed, and not a contract, because it binds only one party.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"deed\", also known in this context as a \"specialty\", is common to signed written undertakings not supported by consideration: the seal (even if not a literal wax seal but only a notional one referred to by the execution formula, \"signed, sealed and delivered\", or even merely \"executed as a deed\") is deemed to be the consideration necessary to support the obligation. \"Poll\" is an archaic legal term referring to documents with straight edges; these distinguished a deed binding only one person from one affecting more than a single person (an \"indenture\", so named during the time when such agreements would be written out repeatedly on a single sheet, then the copies separated by being irregularly torn or cut, i.e. \"indented\", so that each party had a document with corresponding tears, to discourage forgery).\nUse for changing name.\nThe most common use is a name change through a deed of change of name (often referred to simply as a \"deed poll\"). Deeds poll are used for this purpose in countries and regions including in the United Kingdom (except in Scotland), Ireland, Hong Kong, and Singapore. In the UK, a deed poll can also be used to change a child's name, as long as everyone with parental responsibility for the child consents to it and the child does not object to it. The child's parents execute the deed poll on the child's behalf. In some other jurisdictions, a person may simply start using a new name without any formal legal process. The usual requirements are that the new name must be used exclusively and that the change must not be made with the intent to defraud. In English law, a person must notify every creditor of a change of name by deed poll.\nIn Australia, prior to 1 November 2000, name change was accomplished by deed poll but now is done by completing a Change of Name form.\nOther uses.\nAnother common use is to partition land. This form of deed poll is commonly used in Hong Kong.\nA deed poll may also be used (in England and Wales) for clergy of the Church of England to relinquish their holy orders.\nBonds and powers of attorney are examples of deeds poll. A will is not a deed poll, not being made under seal, and being subject to separate statutory requirements."}
{"id": "8088", "revid": "31861199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8088", "title": "Documentary film", "text": "A documentary film (often described simply as a documentary) is a non-fictional motion picture intended to \"document reality, primarily for instruction, education or maintaining a historical record\". The American author and media analyst Bill Nichols has characterized the documentary in terms of \"a filmmaking practice, a cinematic tradition, and mode of audience reception [that remains] a practice without clear boundaries\".\nResearch into information gathering, as a behavior, and the sharing of knowledge, as a concept, has noted how documentary movies were preceded by the notable practice of documentary photography. This has involved the use of singular photographs to detail the complex attributes of historical events and continues to a certain degree to this day, with an example being the conflict-related photography achieved by popular figures such as Mathew Brady during the American Civil War. Documentary movies evolved from the creation of singular images in order to convey particular types of information in depth, using film as a medium.\nEarly documentary films, originally called \"actuality films\", briefly lasted for one minute or less in most cases. While faithfully depicting true events, these releases possessed no narrative structure per se and were of limited interest. Over time, documentaries have evolved to become longer in length and to include more categories of information. Some examples are explicitly educational, while others serve as observational works; docufiction movies notably include aspects of dramatic storytelling that are clearly fictional. Documentaries are informative at times, and certain types are often used within schools as a resource to teach various principles. Documentary filmmakers have a responsibility to be truthful to their vision of the world without intentionally misrepresenting a topic.\nSocial media organizations such as Dailymotion and YouTube, with many of these platforms receiving popular interest, have provided an avenue for the growth of documentaries as a particular film genre. Such platforms have increased the distribution area and ease-of-accessibility given the ability of online video sharing to spread to multiple audiences at once as well as to work past certain socio-political hurdles such as censorship.\nDefinition.\nPolish writer and filmmaker Boles\u0142aw Matuszewski was among those who identified the mode of documentary film. He wrote two of the earliest texts on cinema, \"Une nouvelle source de l'histoire\" (\"A New Source of History\") and \"La photographie anim\u00e9e\" (\"Animated photography\"). Both were published in 1898 in French and were among the earliest written works to consider the historical and documentary value of the film. Matuszewski is also among the first filmmakers to propose the creation of a Film Archive to collect and keep safe visual materials.\nThe word \"documentary\" was coined by Scottish documentary filmmaker John Grierson in his review of Robert Flaherty's film \"Moana\" (1926), published in the \"New York Sun\" on 8 February 1926, written by \"The Moviegoer\" (a pen name for Grierson).\nGrierson's principles of documentary were that cinema's potential for observing life could be exploited in a new art form; that the \"original\" actor and \"original\" scene are better guides than their fiction counterparts for interpreting the modern world; and that materials \"thus taken from the raw\" can be more real than the acted article. In this regard, Grierson's definition of documentary as \"creative treatment of actuality\" has gained some acceptance; however, this position is at variance with Soviet film-maker Dziga Vertov's credos of provocation to present \"life as it is\" (that is, life filmed surreptitiously), and \"life caught unawares\" (life provoked or surprised by the camera).\nThe American film critic Pare Lorentz defines a documentary film as \"a factual film which is dramatic.\" Others further state that a documentary stands out from the other types of non-fiction films for providing an opinion, and a specific message, along with the facts it presents. Scholar Betsy McLane asserted that documentaries are for filmmakers to convey their views about historical events, people, and places which they find significant. Therefore, the advantage of documentaries lies in introducing new perspectives which may not be prevalent in traditional media such as written publications and school curricula.\nDocumentary practice is the complex process of creating documentary projects. It refers to what people do with media devices, content, form, and production strategies to address the creative, ethical, and conceptual problems and choices that arise as they make documentaries.\nDocumentary filmmaking can be used as a form of journalism, advocacy, or personal expression.\nHistory.\nPre-1900.\nEarly film (pre-1900) was dominated by the novelty of showing an event. Single-shot moments were captured on film, such as a train entering a station, a boat docking, or factory workers leaving work. These short films were called \"actuality\" films; the term \"documentary\" was not coined until 1926. Many of the first films, such as those made by Auguste and Louis Lumi\u00e8re, were a minute or less in length, due to technological limitations. Examples can be viewed on YouTube.\nFilms showing many people (for example, leaving a factory) were often made for commercial reasons: the people being filmed were eager to see, for payment, the film showing them. One notable film clocked in at over an hour and a half, \"The Corbett-Fitzsimmons Fight\". Using pioneering film-looping technology, Enoch J. Rector presented the entirety of a famous 1897 prize-fight on cinema screens across the United States.\nIn May 1896, Boles\u0142aw Matuszewski recorded on film a few surgical operations in Warsaw and Saint Petersburg hospitals. In 1898, French surgeon Eug\u00e8ne-Louis Doyen invited Matuszewski and Cl\u00e9ment Maurice to record his surgical operations. They started in Paris a series of surgical films sometime before July 1898. Until 1906, the year of his last film, Doyen recorded more than 60 operations. Doyen said that his first films taught him how to correct professional errors he had been unaware of. For scientific purposes, after 1906, Doyen combined 15 of his films into three compilations, two of which survive, the six-film series \"Extirpation des tumeurs encapsul\u00e9es\" (1906), and the four-film \"Les Op\u00e9rations sur la cavit\u00e9 cr\u00e2nienne\" (1911). These and five other of Doyen's films survive.\nBetween July 1898 and 1901, the Romanian professor Gheorghe Marinescu made several science films in his neurology clinic in Bucharest: \"Walking Troubles of Organic Hemiplegy\" (1898), \"The Walking Troubles of Organic Paraplegies\" (1899), \"A Case of Hysteric Hemiplegy Healed Through Hypnosis\" (1899), \"The Walking Troubles of Progressive Locomotion Ataxy\" (1900), and \"Illnesses of the Muscles\" (1901). All these short films have been preserved. The professor called his works \"studies with the help of the cinematograph,\" and published the results, along with several consecutive frames, in issues of \"La Semaine M\u00e9dicale\" magazine from Paris, between 1899 and 1902. In 1924, Auguste Lumi\u00e8re recognized the merits of Marinescu's science films: \"I've seen your scientific reports about the usage of the cinematograph in studies of nervous illnesses, when I was still receiving \"La Semaine M\u00e9dicale\", but back then I had other concerns, which left me no spare time to begin biological studies. I must say I forgot those works and I am thankful to you that you reminded them to me. Unfortunately, not many scientists have followed your way.\"\n1900\u20131920.\nTravelogue films were very popular in the early part of the 20th century. They were often referred to by distributors as \"scenics\". Scenics were among the most popular sort of films at the time. An important early film which moved beyond the concept of the scenic was \"In the Land of the Head Hunters\" (1914), which embraced primitivism and exoticism in a staged story presented as truthful re-enactments of the life of Native Americans.\nContemplation is a separate area. Path\u00e9 was the best-known global manufacturer of such films in the early 20th century. A vivid example is \"Moscow Clad in Snow\" (1909).\nBiographical documentaries appeared during this time, such as the feature \"Eminescu-Veronica-Creang\u0103\" (1914) on the relationship between the writers Mihai Eminescu, Veronica Micle and Ion Creang\u0103 (all deceased at the time of the production), released by the Bucharest chapter of Path\u00e9.\nEarly color motion picture processes such as Kinemacolor (known for the feature \"With Our King and Queen Through India\" (1912)) and Prizma Color (known for \"Everywhere With Prizma\" (1919) and the five-reel feature \"Bali the Unknown\" (1921)) used travelogues to promote the new color processes. In contrast, Technicolor concentrated primarily on getting their process adopted by Hollywood studios for fiction feature films.\nAlso during this period, Frank Hurley's feature documentary film, \"South\" (1919) about the Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition was released. The film documented the failed Antarctic expedition led by Ernest Shackleton in 1914.\n1920s.\nRomanticism.\nWith Robert J. Flaherty's \"Nanook of the North\" in 1922, documentary film embraced romanticism. Flaherty filmed a number of heavily staged romantic documentary films during this time period, often showing how his subjects would have lived 100 years earlier and not how they lived right then. For instance, in \"Nanook of the North\", Flaherty did not allow his subjects to shoot a walrus with a nearby shotgun, but had them use a harpoon instead. Some of Flaherty's staging, such as building a roofless igloo for interior shots, was done to accommodate the filming technology of the time.\nParamount Pictures tried to repeat the success of Flaherty's \"Nanook\" and \"Moana\" with two romanticized documentaries, \"Grass\" (1925) and \"Chang\" (1927), both directed by Merian C. Cooper and Ernest Schoedsack.\nCity symphony.\nThe \"city symphony\" sub film genre consisted of avant-garde films during the 1920s and 1930s. These films were particularly influenced by modern art, namely Cubism, Constructivism, and Impressionism. According to art historian and author Scott MacDonald, city symphony films can be described as, \"An intersection between documentary and avant-garde film: an \"avant-doc\"\"; however, A.L. Rees suggests regarding them as avant-garde films.\nEarly titles produced within this genre include: \"Manhatta\" (New York; dir. Paul Strand, 1921); \"Rien que les heures/Nothing But The Hours\" (France; dir. Alberto Cavalcanti, 1926); \"Twenty Four Dollar Island\" (dir. Robert J. Flaherty, 1927); \"Moscow\" (dir. Mikhail Kaufman, 1927); \"\u00c9tudes sur Paris\" (dir. Andr\u00e9 Sauvage, 1928); \"The Bridge\" (1928) and \"Rain\" (1929), both by Joris Ivens; \"S\u00e3o Paulo, Sinfonia da Metr\u00f3pole\" (dir. Adalberto Kemeny, 1929), \"\" (dir. Walter Ruttmann, 1927); \"Man with a Movie Camera\" (dir. Dziga Vertov, 1929); \"Douro, Faina Fluvial\" (dir. Manoel de Oliveira, 1931); and \"Rhapsody in Two Languages\" (dir. Gordon Sparling, 1934).\nA city symphony film, as the name suggests, is most often based around a major metropolitan city area and seeks to capture the life, events and activities of the city. It can use abstract cinematography (Walter Ruttman's \"Berlin\") or may use Soviet montage theory (Dziga Vertov's, \"Man with a Movie Camera\"). Most importantly, a city symphony film is a form of cinepoetry, shot and edited in the style of a \"symphony\".\nThe European continental tradition (\"See:\" Realism) focused on humans within human-made environments, and included the so-called city symphony films such as Walter Ruttmann's, \"Berlin: Symphony of a Metropolis\" (of which Grierson noted in an article that \"Berlin,\" represented what a documentary should not be); Alberto Cavalcanti's, \"Rien que les heures;\" and Dziga Vertov's \"Man with a Movie Camera\". These films tend to feature people as products of their environment, and lean towards the avant-garde.\n\"Kino-Pravda\".\nDziga Vertov was central to the Soviet \"Kino-Pravda\" (literally, \"cinematic truth\") newsreel series of the 1920s. Vertov believed the camerawith its varied lenses, shot-counter shot editing, time-lapse, ability to slow motion, stop motion and fast-motioncould render reality more accurately than the human eye, and created a film philosophy from it.\nNewsreel tradition.\nThe newsreel tradition is important in documentary film. Newsreels at this time were sometimes staged but were usually re-enactments of events that had already happened, not attempts to steer events as they were in the process of happening. For instance, much of the battle footage from the early 20th century was staged; the cameramen would usually arrive on site after a major battle and re-enact scenes to film them.\n1930s\u20131940s.\nThe propagandist tradition consists of films made with the explicit purpose of persuading an audience of a point. One of the most celebrated and controversial propaganda films is Leni Riefenstahl's film \"Triumph of the Will\" (1935), which chronicled the 1934 Nazi Party Congress and was commissioned by Adolf Hitler. Leftist filmmakers Joris Ivens and Henri Storck directed \"Borinage\" (1931) about the Belgian coal mining region. Luis Bu\u00f1uel directed a \"surrealist\" documentary \"Las Hurdes\" (1933).\nPare Lorentz's \"The Plow That Broke the Plains\" (1936) and \"The River\" (1938) and Willard Van Dyke's \"The City\" (1939) are notable New Deal productions, each presenting complex combinations of social and ecological awareness, government propaganda, and leftist viewpoints. Frank Capra's \"Why We Fight\" (1942\u20131944) series was a newsreel series in the United States, commissioned by the government to convince the U.S. public that it was time to go to war. Constance Bennett and her husband Henri de la Falaise produced two feature-length documentaries, \"\" (1935) filmed in Bali, and \"Kilou the Killer Tiger\" (1936) filmed in Indochina.\nIn Canada, the Film Board, set up by John Grierson, was set up for the same propaganda reasons. It also created newsreels that were seen by their national governments as legitimate counter-propaganda to the psychological warfare of Nazi Germany orchestrated by Joseph Goebbels.\nIn Britain, a number of different filmmakers came together under John Grierson. They became known as the Documentary Film Movement. Grierson, Alberto Cavalcanti, Harry Watt, Basil Wright, and Humphrey Jennings amongst others succeeded in blending propaganda, information, and education with a more poetic aesthetic approach to documentary. Examples of their work include \"Drifters\" (John Grierson), \"Song of Ceylon\" (Basil Wright), \"Fires Were Started\", and \"A Diary for Timothy\" (Humphrey Jennings). Their work involved poets such as W. H. Auden, composers such as Benjamin Britten, and writers such as J. B. Priestley. Among the best known films of the movement are \"Night Mail\" and \"Coal Face\".\n\"Calling Mr. Smith\" (1943) is an anti-Nazi color film created by Stefan Themerson which is both a documentary and an avant-garde film against war. It was one of the first anti-Nazi films in history.\n1950s\u20131970s.\nCin\u00e9ma-v\u00e9rit\u00e9.\nCin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9 (or the closely related direct cinema) was dependent on some technical advances to exist: light, quiet and reliable cameras, and portable sync sound.\nCin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9 and similar documentary traditions can thus be seen, in a broader perspective, as a reaction against studio-based film production constraints. Shooting on location, with smaller crews, would also happen in the French New Wave, the filmmakers taking advantage of advances in technology allowing smaller, handheld cameras and synchronized sound to film events on location as they unfolded.\nAlthough the terms are sometimes used interchangeably, there are important differences between cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9 (Jean Rouch) and the North American \"direct cinema\" (or more accurately \"\"), pioneered by, among others, Canadians , Pierre Perrault and Allan King, and Americans Robert Drew, Richard Leacock, Frederick Wiseman and Albert and David Maysles.\nThe directors of the movement take different viewpoints on their degree of involvement with their subjects. Kopple and Pennebaker, for instance, choose non-involvement (or at least no overt involvement), and Perrault, Rouch, Koenig, and Kroitor favor direct involvement or even provocation when they deem it necessary.\nThe films \"Chronicle of a Summer\" (Jean Rouch), \"Dont Look Back\" (D. A. Pennebaker), \"Grey Gardens\" (Albert and David Maysles), \"Titicut Follies\" (Frederick Wiseman), \"Primary\" and \"\" (both produced by Robert Drew), \"Harlan County, USA\" (directed by Barbara Kopple), \"Lonely Boy\" (Wolf Koenig and Roman Kroitor) are all frequently deemed cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9 films.\nThe fundamentals of the style include following a person during a crisis with a moving, often handheld, camera to capture more personal reactions. There are no sit-down interviews, and the shooting ratio (the amount of film shot to the finished product) is very high, often reaching 80 to one. From there, editors find and sculpt the work into a film. The editors of the movementsuch as Werner Nold, Charlotte Zwerin, Muffie Meyer, Susan Froemke, and Ellen Hovdeare often overlooked, but their input to the films was so vital that they were often given co-director credits.\nFamous cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9/direct cinema films include \"Les Raquetteurs\", \"Showman\", \"Salesman\", \"Near Death\", and \"The Children Were Watching\".\nPolitical weapons.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, documentary film was often regarded as a political weapon against neocolonialism and capitalism in general, especially in Latin America, but also in a changing society. (\"The Hour of the Furnaces\", from 1968), directed by Octavio Getino and Fernando Solanas, influenced a whole generation of filmmakers. Among the many political documentaries produced in the early 1970s was \"Chile: A Special Report\", public television's first in-depth expository look at the September 1973 overthrow of the Salvador Allende government in Chile by military leaders under Augusto Pinochet, produced by documentarians Ari Martinez and Jos\u00e9 Garcia.\nA June 2020 article in \"The New York Times\" reviewed the political documentary \"And She Could Be Next\", directed by Grace Lee and Marjan Safinia. The \"Times\" described the documentary not only as focusing on women in politics, but more specifically on women of color, their communities, and the significant changes they have wrought upon America.\nModern documentaries.\nBox office analysts have noted that the documentary film genre has become increasingly successful in theatrical release with films such as \"Fahrenheit 9/11\", \"Super Size Me\", \"Food, Inc.\", \"Earth\", \"March of the Penguins\", and \"An Inconvenient Truth\" among the most prominent examples. Compared to dramatic narrative films, documentaries typically have far lower budgets which makes them attractive to film companies because even a limited theatrical release can be highly profitable.\nThe nature of documentary films has expanded in the past 30 years from the cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9 style introduced in the 1960s in which the use of portable camera and sound equipment allowed an intimate relationship between filmmaker and subject. The line blurs between documentary and narrative and some works are very personal, such as Marlon Riggs's \"Tongues Untied\" (1989) and \"Black Is...Black Ain't\" (1995), which mix expressive, poetic, and rhetorical elements and stresses subjectivities rather than historical materials.\nHistorical documentaries, such as the landmark 14-hour \"Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Years\" (1986Part 1 and 1989Part 2) by Henry Hampton, \"4 Little Girls\" (1997) by Spike Lee, \"The Civil War\" by Ken Burns, and UNESCO-awarded independent film on slavery \"500 Years Later\", express not only a distinctive voice but also a perspective and point of views. Some films such as \"The Thin Blue Line\" by Errol Morris incorporate stylized re-enactments, and Michael Moore's \"Roger &amp; Me\" place far more interpretive control with the director. The commercial success of these documentaries may derive from this narrative shift in the documentary form, leading some critics to question whether such films can truly be called documentaries; critics sometimes refer to these works as \"mondo films\" or \"docu-ganda.\" However, directorial manipulation of documentary subjects has been noted since the work of Flaherty, and may be endemic to the form due to problematic ontological foundations.\nDocumentary filmmakers are increasingly using social impact campaigns with their films. Social impact campaigns seek to leverage media projects by converting public awareness of social issues and causes into engagement and action, largely by offering the audience a way to get involved. Examples of such documentaries include \"Kony 2012\", \"Salam Neighbor, Gasland\", \"Living on One Dollar\", and \"Girl Rising\".\nAlthough documentaries are financially more viable with the increasing popularity of the genre and the advent of the DVD, funding for documentary film production remains elusive. Within the past decade, the largest exhibition opportunities have emerged from within the broadcast market, making filmmakers beholden to the tastes and influences of the broadcasters who have become their largest funding source.\nModern documentaries have some overlap with television forms, with the development of \"reality television\" that occasionally verges on the documentary but more often veers to the fictional or staged. The \"making-of\" documentary shows how a movie or a computer game was produced. Usually made for promotional purposes, it is closer to an advertisement than a classic documentary.\nModern lightweight digital video cameras and computer-based editing have greatly aided documentary makers, as has the dramatic drop in equipment prices. The first film to take full advantage of this change was Martin Kunert and Eric Manes' \"Voices of Iraq\", where 150 DV cameras were sent to Iraq during the war and passed out to Iraqis to record themselves.\nDocumentaries without words.\nFilms in the documentary form without words have been made. \"Listen to Britain\", directed by Humphrey Jennings and Stuart McAllister in 1942, is a wordless meditation on wartime Britain. From 1982, the Qatsi trilogy and the similar \"Baraka\" could be described as visual tone poems, with music related to the images, but no spoken content. \"Koyaanisqatsi\" (part of the Qatsi trilogy) consists primarily of slow motion and time-lapse photography of cities and many natural landscapes across the United States. \"Baraka\" tries to capture the great pulse of humanity as it flocks and swarms in daily activity and religious ceremonies.\n\"Bodysong\" was made in 2003 and won a British Independent Film Award for \"Best British Documentary.\"\nThe 2004 film \"Genesis\" shows animal and plant life in states of expansion, decay, sex, and death, with some, but little, narration.\nNarration styles.\nThe traditional style for narration is to have a dedicated narrator read a script which is dubbed onto the audio track. The narrator never appears on camera and may not necessarily have knowledge of the subject matter or involvement in the writing of the script.\nThis style of narration uses title screens to visually narrate the documentary. The screens are held for about 5\u201310 seconds to allow adequate time for the viewer to read them. They are similar to the ones shown at the end of movies based on true stories, but they are shown throughout, typically between scenes.\nIn this style, there is a host who appears on camera, conducts interviews, and who also does voice-overs.\nOther forms.\nHybrid documentary.\nThe release of \"The Thin Blue Line\" (1988) directed by Errol Morris introduced possibilities for emerging forms of the hybrid documentary. Indeed, it was disqualified for an Academy Award because of the stylized recreations. Traditional documentary filmmaking typically removes signs of fictionalization to distinguish itself from fictional film genres. Audiences have recently become more distrustful of the media's traditional fact production, making them more receptive to experimental ways of telling facts. The hybrid documentary implements truth games to challenge traditional fact production. Although it is fact-based, the hybrid documentary is not explicit about what should be understood, creating an open dialogue between subject and audience. Clio Barnard's \"The Arbor\" (2010), Joshua Oppenheimer's \"The Act of Killing\" (2012), Mads Br\u00fcgger's \"The Ambassador\", and Alma Har'el's \"Bombay Beach\" (2011) are a few notable examples.\nDocufiction.\nDocufiction is a hybrid genre from two basic ones, fiction film and documentary, practiced since the first documentary films were made.\nFake-fiction.\nFake-fiction is a genre which deliberately presents real, unscripted events in the form of a fiction film, making them appear as staged. The concept was introduced by Pierre Bismuth to describe his 2016 film \"Where is Rocky II?\"\nDVD documentary.\nA DVD documentary is a documentary film of indeterminate length that has been produced with the sole intent of releasing it for direct sale to the public on DVD, which is different from a documentary being made and released first on television or on a cinema screen (a.k.a. theatrical release) and subsequently on DVD for public consumption.\nThis form of documentary release is becoming more popular and accepted as costs and difficulty with finding TV or theatrical release slots increases. It is also commonly used for more \"specialist\" documentaries, which might not have general interest to a wider TV audience. Examples are military, cultural arts, transport, sports, animals, etc.\nCompilation films.\nCompilation films were pioneered in 1927 by Esfir Schub with \"The Fall of the Romanov Dynasty\". More recent examples include \"Point of Order!\" (1964), directed by Emile de Antonio about the McCarthy hearings. Similarly, \"The Last Cigarette\" combines the testimony of various tobacco company executives before the U.S. Congress with archival propaganda extolling the virtues of smoking.\nPoetic documentaries, which first appeared in the 1920s, were a sort of reaction against both the content and the rapidly crystallizing grammar of the early fiction film. The poetic mode moved away from continuity editing and instead organized images of the material world by means of associations and patterns, both in terms of time and space. Well-rounded characters\"lifelike people\"were absent; instead, people appeared in these films as entities, just like any other, that are found in the material world. The films were fragmentary, impressionistic, lyrical. Their disruption of the coherence of time and spacea coherence favored by the fiction films of the daycan also be seen as an element of the modernist counter-model of cinematic narrative. The \"real world\"Nichols calls it the \"historical world\"was broken up into fragments and aesthetically reconstituted using film form. Examples of this style include Joris Ivens' \"Rain\" (1928), which records a passing summer shower over Amsterdam; L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Moholy-Nagy's \"Play of Light: Black, White, Grey (1930)\", in which he films one of his own kinetic sculptures, emphasizing not the sculpture itself but the play of light around it; Oskar Fischinger's abstract animated films; Francis Thompson's \"N.Y., N.Y.\" (1957), a city symphony film; and Chris Marker's \"Sans Soleil\" (1982).\nExpository documentaries speak directly to the viewer, often in the form of an authoritative commentary employing voiceover or titles, proposing a strong argument and point of view. These films are rhetorical, and try to persuade the viewer. (They may use a rich and sonorous male voice.) The (voice-of-God) commentary often sounds \"objective\" and omniscient. Images are often not paramount; they exist to advance the argument. The rhetoric insistently presses upon us to read the images in a certain fashion. Historical documentaries in this mode deliver an unproblematic and \"objective\" account and interpretation of past events.\nExamples: TV shows and films like \"Biography\", \"America's Most Wanted\", many science and nature documentaries, Ken Burns' \"The Civil War\" (1990), Robert Hughes' \"The Shock of the New\" (1980), John Berger's \"Ways of Seeing\" (1972), Frank Capra's wartime \"Why We Fight\" series, and Pare Lorentz's \"The Plow That Broke the Plains\" (1936).\nObservational.\nObservational documentaries attempt to spontaneously observe their subjects with minimal intervention. Filmmakers who worked in this subgenre often saw the poetic mode as too abstract and the expository mode as too didactic. The first observational docs date back to the 1960s; the technological developments which made them possible include mobile lightweight cameras and portable sound recording equipment for synchronized sound. Often, this mode of film eschewed voice-over commentary, post-synchronized dialogue and music, or re-enactments. The films aimed for immediacy, intimacy, and revelation of individual human character in ordinary life situations.\nTypes.\nParticipatory documentaries believe that it is impossible for the act of filmmaking to not influence or alter the events being filmed. What these films do is emulate the approach of the anthropologist: participant-observation. Not only is the filmmaker part of the film, we also get a sense of how situations in the film are affected or altered by their presence. Nichols: \"The filmmaker steps out from behind the cloak of voice-over commentary, steps away from poetic meditation, steps down from a fly-on-the-wall perch, and becomes a social actor (almost) like any other. (Almost like any other because the filmmaker retains the camera, and with it, a certain degree of potential power and control over events.)\" The encounter between filmmaker and subject becomes a critical element of the film. Rouch and Morin named the approach cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9, translating Dziga Vertov's kinopravda into French; the \"truth\" refers to the truth of the encounter rather than some absolute truth.\nReflexive documentaries do not see themselves as a transparent window on the world; instead, they draw attention to their own constructedness, and the fact that they are representations. How does the world get represented by documentary films? This question is central to this subgenre of films. They prompt us to \"question the authenticity of documentary in general.\" It is the most self-conscious of all the modes, and is highly skeptical of \"realism\". It may use Brechtian alienation strategies to jar us, in order to \"defamiliarize\" what we are seeing and how we are seeing it.\nPerformative documentaries stress subjective experience and emotional response to the world. They are strongly personal, unconventional, perhaps poetic and/or experimental, and might include hypothetical enactments of events designed to make us experience what it might be like for us to possess a certain specific perspective on the world that is not our own, e.g. that of black, gay men in Marlon Riggs's \"Tongues Untied\" (1989) or Jenny Livingston's \"Paris Is Burning\" (1991). This subgenre might also lend itself to certain groups (e.g. women, ethnic minorities, gays and lesbians, etc.) to \"speak about themselves\". Often, a battery of techniques, many borrowed from fiction or avant-garde films, are used. Performative docs often link up personal accounts or experiences with larger political or historical realities.\nEducational films.\nDocumentaries are shown in schools around the world in order to educate students. Used to introduce various topics to children, they are often used with a school lesson or shown many times to reinforce an idea.\nTranslation.\nThere are several challenges associated with translation of documentaries. The main two are working conditions and problems with terminology.\nWorking conditions.\nDocumentary translators very often have to meet tight deadlines. Normally, the translator has between five and seven days to hand over the translation of a 90-minute programme. Dubbing studios typically give translators a week to translate a documentary, but in order to earn a good salary, translators have to deliver their translations in a much shorter period, usually when the studio decides to deliver the final programme to the client sooner or when the broadcasting channel sets a tight deadline, e.g. on documentaries discussing the latest news.\nAnother problem is the lack of postproduction script or the poor quality of the transcription. A correct transcription is essential for a translator to do their work properly, however many times the script is not even given to the translator, which is a major impediment since documentaries are characterised by \"the abundance of terminological units and very specific proper names\". When the script is given to the translator, it is usually poorly transcribed or outright incorrect making the translation unnecessarily difficult and demanding because all of the proper names and specific terminology have to be correct in a documentary programme in order for it to be a reliable source of information, hence the translator has to check every term on their own. Such mistakes in proper names are for instance: \"Jungle Reinhard instead of Django Reinhart, Jorn Asten instead of Jane Austen, and Magnus Axle instead of Aldous Huxley\".\nTerminology.\nThe process of translation of a documentary programme requires working with very specific, often scientific terminology. Documentary translators are not usually specialists in a given field. Therefore, they are compelled to undertake extensive research whenever asked to make a translation of a specific documentary programme in order to understand it correctly and deliver the final product free of mistakes and inaccuracies. Generally, documentaries contain a large number of specific terms, with which translators have to familiarise themselves on their own, for example:\nThe documentary \"Beetles, Record Breakers\" makes use of 15 different terms to refer to beetles in less than 30 minutes (longhorn beetle, cellar beetle, stag beetle, burying beetle or gravediggers, sexton beetle, tiger beetle, bloody nose beetle, tortoise beetle, diving beetle, devil's coach horse, weevil, click beetle, malachite beetle, oil beetle, cockchafer), apart from mentioning other animals such as horseshoe bats or meadow brown butterflies.\nThis poses a real challenge for the translators because they have to render the meaning, i.e. find an equivalent, of a very specific, scientific term in the target language and frequently the narrator uses a more general name instead of a specific term and the translator has to rely on the image presented in the programme to understand which term is being discussed in order to transpose it in the target language accordingly. Additionally, translators of minorised languages often have to face another problem: some terms may not even exist in the target language. In such cases, they have to create new terminology or consult specialists to find proper solutions. Also, sometimes the official nomenclature differs from the terminology used by actual specialists, which leaves the translator to decide between using the official vocabulary that can be found in the dictionary, or rather opting for spontaneous expressions used by real experts in real life situations."}
{"id": "8089", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8089", "title": "Drama film", "text": ""}
{"id": "8090", "revid": "1246683657", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8090", "title": "Day of the Tentacle", "text": "Day of the Tentacle, also known as Maniac Mansion II: Day of the Tentacle, is a 1993 graphic adventure game developed and published by LucasArts. It is the sequel to the 1987 game \"Maniac Mansion\". The plot follows Bernard Bernoulli and his friends Hoagie and Laverne as they attempt to stop the evil Purple Tentacle - a sentient, disembodied tentacle - from taking over the world. The player takes control of the trio and solves puzzles while using time travel to explore different periods of history.\nDave Grossman and Tim Schafer co-led the game's development, their first time in such a role. The pair carried over a limited number of elements from \"Maniac Mansion\" and forwent the character selection aspect to simplify development. Inspirations included Chuck Jones cartoons and the history of the United States. \"Day of the Tentacle\" was the eighth LucasArts game to use the SCUMM engine.\nThe game was released simultaneously on floppy disk and CD-ROM to critical acclaim and commercial success. Critics focused on its cartoon-style visuals and comedic elements. \"Day of the Tentacle\" has featured regularly in lists of \"top\" games published more than two decades after its release, and has been referenced in popular culture. A remastered version of \"Day of the Tentacle\" was developed by Schafer's current studio, Double Fine Productions, and released in March 2016, for OS X, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, and Windows, with an iOS and Linux port released in July the same year, and then later for Xbox One in October 2020.\nGameplay.\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" follows the point-and-click two-dimensional adventure game formula, first established by the original \"Maniac Mansion\". Players direct the controllable characters around the game world by clicking with the computer mouse. To interact with the game world, players choose from a set of nine commands arrayed on the screen (such as \"pick up\", \"use\", or \"talk to\") and then on an object in the world. This was the last SCUMM game to use the original interface of having the bottom of the screen being taken up by a verb selection and inventory; starting with the next game to use the SCUMM engine, \"Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road\", the engine was modified to scroll through a more concise list of verbs with the right mouse button and having the inventory on a separate screen.\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" uses time travel extensively; early in the game, the three main protagonists are separated across time by the effects of a faulty time machine. The player, after completing certain puzzles, can then freely switch between these characters, interacting with the game's world in separate time periods. Certain small inventory items can be shared by placing the item into the \"Chron-o-Johns\", modified portable toilets that instantly transport objects to one of the other time periods, while other items are shared by simply leaving the item in a past time period to be picked up by a character in a future period. Changes made to a past time period will affect a future one, and many of the game's puzzles are based on the effect of time travel, the aging of certain items, and alterations of the time stream. For example, one puzzle requires the player, while in the future era where Purple Tentacle has succeeded, to send a medical chart of a Tentacle back to the past, having it used as the design of the American flag, then collecting one such flag in the future to be used as a Tentacle disguise to allow that character to roam freely.\nThe whole original \"Maniac Mansion\" game can be played on a computer resembling a Commodore 64 inside the \"Day of the Tentacle\" game; this practice has since been repeated by other game developers, but at the time of \"Day of the Tentacle's\" release, it was unprecedented.\nPlot.\nFive years after the events of \"Maniac Mansion\", Purple Tentacle\u2014a mutant monster and lab assistant created by mad scientist Dr. Fred Edison\u2014drinks toxic sludge from a river behind Dr. Fred's laboratory. The sludge causes him to grow a pair of flipper-like arms, develop vastly increased intelligence, and have a thirst for global domination. Dr. Fred plans to resolve the issue by killing Purple Tentacle and his harmless, friendly brother Green Tentacle, but Green Tentacle sends a plea of help to his old friend, the nerd Bernard Bernoulli. Bernard travels to the Edison family motel with his two housemates, deranged medical student Laverne and roadie Hoagie, and frees the tentacles. Purple Tentacle escapes to resume his quest to take over the world.\nSince Purple Tentacle's plans are flawless and unstoppable, Dr. Fred decides to use his Chron-o-John time machines to send Bernard, Laverne, and Hoagie to the day before to turn off his Sludge-o-Matic machine, thereby preventing Purple Tentacle's exposure to the sludge. However, because Dr. Fred used an imitation diamond rather than a real diamond as a power source for the time machine, the Chron-o-Johns break down in operation. Laverne is sent 200 years in the future, where humanity has been enslaved and Purple Tentacle rules the world from the Edison mansion, while Hoagie is dropped 200 years in the past, where the motel is being used by the Founding Fathers as a retreat to write the United States Constitution. Bernard is returned to the present. To salvage Dr. Fred's plan, Bernard must acquire a replacement diamond for the time machine, while both Hoagie and Laverne must restore power to their respective Chron-o-John pods by plugging them in. To overcome the lack of electricity in the past, Hoagie recruits the help of Benjamin Franklin and Dr. Fred's ancestor, Red Edison, to build a superbattery to power his pod, while Laverne evades capture by the tentacles long enough to run an extension cord to her unit. The three send small objects back and forth in time through the Chron-o-Johns and make changes to history to help the others complete their tasks.\nEventually, Bernard uses Dr. Fred's family fortune of royalties from the use of their likeness in \"Maniac Mansion\" to purchase a real diamond, while his friends manage to power their Chron-o-Johns. Soon, the three are reunited in the present. Purple Tentacle arrives, hijacks a Chron-o-John, and takes it to the previous day to prevent them from turning off the sludge machine; he is pursued by Green Tentacle in another pod. With only one Chron-o-John pod left, Bernard, Hoagie, and Laverne use it to pursue the tentacles to the previous day, while Dr. Fred uselessly tries to warn them of using the pod together, referencing the film \"The Fly\". Upon arriving, the trio exit the pod only to discover that they have been turned into a three-headed monster, their bodies merging into one during the transfer. Meanwhile, Purple Tentacle has used the time machine to bring countless versions of himself from different moments in time to the same day to prevent the Sludge-o-Matic from being deactivated. Bernard and his friends defeat the Purple Tentacles guarding the Sludge-o-Matic, turn off the machine, and prevent the whole series of events from ever happening. Returning to the present, Dr. Fred discovers that the three have not been turned into a monster at all but have just gotten stuck in the same set of clothes; they are then ordered by Dr. Fred to get out of his house. The game ends with the credits rolling over a tentacle-shaped American flag, one of the more significant results of their tampering in history.\nDevelopment.\nFollowing a string of successful adventure games, LucasArts assigned Dave Grossman and Tim Schafer to lead development of a new game. The two had previously assisted Ron Gilbert with the creation of \"The Secret of Monkey Island\" and \"\", and the studio felt that Grossman and Schafer were ready to manage a project. The company believed that the pair's humor matched well with that of \"Maniac Mansion\" and suggested working on a sequel. The two developers agreed and commenced production. Gilbert and Gary Winnick, the creators of \"Maniac Mansion\", collaborated with Grossman and Schafer on the initial planning and writing. The total budget for the game was about $600,000, according to Schafer.\nCreative design.\nIn planning the plot, the four designers considered a number of concepts, eventually choosing an idea of Gilbert's about time travel that they believed was the most interesting. The four discussed what time periods to focus on, settling on the Revolutionary War and the future. The Revolutionary War offered opportunities to craft many puzzles around that period, such as changing the Constitution to affect the future. Grossman noted the appeal of the need to make wide-sweeping changes such as the Constitution just to achieve a small personal goal, believing this captured the essence of adventure games. The future period allowed them to explore the nature of cause and effect without any historical bounds. Grossman and Schafer decided to carry over previous characters that they felt were the most entertaining. The two considered the Edison family \"essential\" and chose Bernard because of his \"unqualified nerdiness\". Bernard was considered \"everyone's favorite character\" from \"Maniac Mansion\", and was the clear first choice for the protagonists. The game's other protagonists, Laverne and Hoagie, were based on a Mexican ex-girlfriend of Grossman's and a Megadeth roadie named Tony that Schafer had met, respectively. Schafer and Grossman planned to use a character selection system similar to the first game but felt that it would have complicated the design process and increased production costs. Believing that it added little to the gameplay, they removed it early in the process and reduced the number of player characters from six to three. The dropped characters included Razor, a female musician from the previous game; Moonglow, a short character in baggy clothes; and Chester, a black beat poet. Ideas for Chester, however, morphed into new twin characters in the Edison family. The smaller number of characters reduced the strain on the game's engine in terms of scripting and animation.\nThe staff collaboratively designed the characters. They first discussed the character personalities, which Larry Ahern used to create concept art. Ahern wanted to make sure that the art style was consistent and the character designs were established early, in contrast to what had happened with \"Monkey Island 2\", in which various artists came in later to help fill in art assets as necessary, creating a disjointed style. Looney Tunes animation shorts, particularly the Chuck Jones-directed \"Rabbit of Seville\", \"What's Opera, Doc?\", and \"Duck Dodgers in the 24\u00bdth Century\" inspired the artistic design. The cartoonish style also lent itself to providing larger visible faces to enable more expressive characters. Peter Chan designed backgrounds, spending around two days to progress from concept sketch to final art for each background. Chan too used Looney Tunes as influence for the backgrounds, trying to emulate the style of Jones and Maurice Noble. Ahern and Chan went back and forth with character and background art to make sure both styles worked together without too much distraction. They further had Jones visit their studio during development to provide input into their developing art. The choice of art style inspired further ideas from the designers. Grossman cited cartoons featuring Pep\u00e9 Le Pew, and commented that the gag involving a painted white stripe on Penelope Pussycat inspired a puzzle in the game. The artists spent a year creating the in-game animations.\nThe script was written in the evening when fewer people were in the office. Grossman considered it the easiest aspect of production, but encountered difficulties when writing with others around.\nGrossman and Schafer brainstormed regularly to devise the time travel puzzles and collaborated with members of the development team as well as other LucasArts employees. They would identify puzzle problems and work towards a solution similar to how the game plays. Most issues were addressed prior to programming, but some details were left unfinished to work on later. The staff conceived puzzles involving the U.S.'s early history based on their memory of their compulsory education, and using the more legendary aspects of history, such as George Washington cutting down a cherry tree to appeal to international audiences. To complete the elements, Grossman researched the period to maintain historical accuracy, visiting libraries and contacting reference librarians. The studio, however, took creative license towards facts to fit them into the game's design.\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" features a four-minute-long animated opening credit sequence, the first LucasArts game to have such. Ahern noted that their previous games would run the credits over primarily still shots which would only last for a few minutes, but with \"Tentacle\", the team had grown so large that they worried this approach would be boring to players. They assigned Kyle Balda, an intern at CalArts, to create the animated sequence, with Chan helping to create minimalist backgrounds to aid in the animation. Originally this sequence was around seven minutes long, and included the three characters arriving at the mansion and releasing Purple Tentacle. Another LucasArts designer, Hal Barwood, suggested they cut it in half, leading to the shortened version as in the released game, and having the player take over when they arrive at the mansion.\nTechnology and audio.\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" uses the SCUMM engine developed for \"Maniac Mansion\". LucasArts had gradually modified the engine since its creation. For example, the number of input verbs was reduced and items in the character's inventory are represented by icons rather than text. While implementing an animation, the designers encountered a problem later discovered to be a limitation of the engine. Upon learning of the limitation, Gilbert reminisced about the file size of the first game. The staff then resolved to include it in the sequel.\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" was the first LucasArts adventure game to feature voice work on release. The game was not originally planned to include voice work, as at the time, the install base for CD-ROM was too low. As they neared the end of 1992, CD-ROM sales grew significantly. The general manager of LucasArts, Kelly Flock, recognizing that the game would not be done in time by the end of the year to make the holiday release, suggested that the team include voice work for the game, giving them more time.\nVoice director Tamlynn Barra managed that aspect of the game. Schafer and Grossman described how they imagined the characters' voices and Barra sought audition tapes of voice actors to meet the criteria. She presented the best auditions to the pair. Schafer's sister Ginny was among the auditions, and she was chosen for Nurse Edna. Schafer opted out of the decision for her selection to avoid nepotism. Grossman and Schafer encountered difficulty selecting a voice for Bernard. To aid the process, Grossman commented that the character should sound like Les Nessman from the television show \"WKRP in Cincinnati\". Barra responded that she knew the agent of the character's actor, Richard Sanders, and brought Sanders on the project. Denny Delk and Nick Jameson were among those hired, and provided voice work for around five characters each. Recording for the 4,500 lines of dialog occurred at Studio 222 in Hollywood. Barra directed the voice actors separately from a sound production booth. She provided context for each line and described aspects of the game to aid the actors. The voice work in Day of the Tentacle was widely praised for its quality and professionalism in comparison to Sierra's talkie games of the period which suffered from poor audio quality and limited voice acting (some of which consisted of Sierra employees rather than professional talent).\nThe game's music was composed by Peter McConnell, Michael Land, and Clint Bajakian. The three had worked together to share the duties equally of composing the music for \"Monkey Island 2\" and \"Fate of Atlantis\", and continued this approach for \"Day of the Tentacle\". According to McConnell, he had composed most of the music taking place in the game's present, Land for the future, and Bajakian for the past, outside of Dr. Fred's theme for the past which McConnell had done. The music was composed around the cartoonish nature of the gameplay, further drawing on Looney Tunes' use of parodying classical works of music, and playing on set themes for all of the major characters in the game. Many of these themes had to be composed to take into account different processing speeds of computers at the time, managed by the iMUSE music interface; such themes would include shorter repeating patterns that would play while the game's screen scrolled across, and then once the screen was at the proper place, the music would continue on to a more dramatic phrase.\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" was one of the first games concurrently released on CD-ROM and floppy disk. A floppy disk version was created to accommodate consumers that had yet to purchase CD-ROM drives. The CD-ROM format afforded the addition of audible dialog. The capacity difference between the two formats necessitated alterations to the floppy disk version. Grossman spent several weeks reducing files sizes and removing files such as the audio dialog to fit the game onto six diskettes.\nReception.\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" was a moderate commercial success; according to \"Edge\", it sold roughly 80,000 copies by 2009. Tim Schafer saw this as an improvement over his earlier projects, the \"Monkey Island\" games, which had been commercial flops. The game was critically acclaimed. Charles Ardai of \"Computer Gaming World\" wrote in September 1993: \"Calling \"Day of the Tentacle\" a sequel to \"Maniac Mansion\"\u00a0... is a little like calling the space shuttle a sequel to the slingshot\". He enjoyed the game's humor and interface, and praised the designers for removing \"dead end\" scenarios and player character death. Ardai lauded the voice acting, writing that it \"would have done the late Mel Blanc proud\", and compared the game's humor, animation, and camera angles to \"Looney Toons gems from the 40s and 50s\". He concluded: \"I expect that this game will keep entertaining people for quite some time to come\". In April 1994 the magazine said of the CD version that Sanders's Bernard was among \"many other inspired performances\", concluding that \"Chuck Jones would be proud\". In May 1994 the magazine said of one multimedia kit bundling the CD version that \"it packs more value into the kit than the entire software packages of some of its competitors\". Sandy Petersen of \"Dragon\" stated that its graphics \"are in a stupendous cartoony style\", while praising its humor and describing its sound and music as \"excellent\". Although the reviewer considered it \"one of the best\" graphic adventure games, he noted that, like LucasArts' earlier \"Loom\", it was extremely short; he wrote that he \"felt cheated somehow when I finished the game\". He ended the review, \"Go, Lucasfilm! Do this again, but do make the next game longer!\".\nPhil LaRose of \"The Advocate\" called it \"light-years ahead of the original\", and believed that its \"improved controls, sound and graphics are an evolutionary leap to a more enjoyable gaming experience\". He praised the interface, and summarized the game as \"another of the excellent LucasArts programs that place a higher premium on the quality of entertainment and less on the technical knowledge needed to make it run\". The \"Boston Herald\"s Geoff Smith noted that \"the animation of the cartoonlike characters is of TV quality\", and praised the removal of dead ends and character death. He ended: \"It's full of lunacy, but for anyone who likes light-hearted adventure games, it's well worth trying\". Vox Day of \"The Blade\" called its visuals \"well done\" and compared them to those of \"The Ren &amp; Stimpy Show\". The writer praised the game's humor, and said that \"both the music and sound effects are hilarious\"; he cited the voice performance of Richard Sanders as a high point. He summarized the game as \"both a good adventure and a funny cartoon\".\nLim Choon Wee of the \"New Straits Times\" highly praised the game's humor, which he called \"brilliantly funny\". The writer commented that the game's puzzles relied on \"trial and error\" with \"no underlying logic\", but opined that the game \"remains fun\" despite this issue, and concluded that \"Day of the Tentacle\" was \"definitely the comedy game of the year\". Daniel Baum of \"The Jerusalem Post\" called it \"one of the funniest, most entertaining and best-programmed computer games I have ever seen\", and lauded its animation. He wrote that the game provided \"a more polished impression\" than either \"The Secret of Monkey Island\" or \"\". The writer claimed that its high system requirements were its only drawback, and believed that a Sound Blaster card was required to fully appreciate the game. In a retrospective review, Adventure Gamers' Chris Remo wrote: \"If someone were to ask for a few examples of games that exemplify the best of the graphic adventure genre, \"Day of the Tentacle\" would certainly be near the top\".\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" has been featured regularly in lists of \"top\" games. In 1994, \"PC Gamer US\" named \"Day of the Tentacle\" the 46th best computer game ever. In June 1994 it and \"\" won \"Computer Gaming World\"s Adventure Game of the Year award. The editors wrote that \"\"Day of the Tentacle\"s fluid animation sequences underscore a strong script and solid game play ... story won out over technological innovation in this genre\". In 1996, the magazine ranked it as the 34th best game of all time, writing: \"\"DOTT\" completely blew away its ancestor, \"Maniac Mansion\", with its smooth animated sequences, nifty plot and great voiceovers\". Adventure Gamers included the game as the top entry on its 20 Greatest Adventure Games of All Time List in 2004, and placed it sixth on its Top 100 All-Time Adventure Games in 2011. The game has appeared on several IGN lists. The website rated it number 60 and 84 on its top 100 games list in 2005 and 2007, respectively. IGN named \"Day of the Tentacle\" as part of their top 10 LucasArts adventure games in 2009, and ranked the Purple Tentacle 82nd in a list of top 100 videogame villains in 2010. ComputerAndVideoGames.com ranked it at number 30 in 2008, and GameSpot also listed \"Day of the Tentacle\" as one of the greatest games of all time.\nLegacy.\nFans of \"Day of the Tentacle\" created a webcomic, \"The Day After the Day of the Tentacle\", using the game's graphics. The 1993 LucasArts game \"Zombies Ate My Neighbors\" features a stage dedicated to \"Day of the Tentacle\". The artists for \"Day of the Tentacle\" shared office space with the \"Zombies Ate My Neighbors\" development team. The team included the homage after frequently seeing artwork for \"Day of the Tentacle\" during the two games' productions. In describing what he considered \"the most rewarding moment\" of his career, Grossman stated that the game's writing and use of spoken and subtitled dialog assisted a learning-disabled child in learning how to read. Telltale Games CEO Dan Connors commented in 2009 that an episodic game based on \"Day of the Tentacle\" was \"feasible\", but depended on the sales of the \"Monkey Island\" games released that year.\nIn 2018, a fan-made sequel, \"Return of the Tentacle\", was released free by a team from Germany. The game imitates the art style of the \"Remastered\" edition and features full voice acting.\nRemasters.\n\"Special Edition\".\nAccording to Kotaku, a remastered version of \"Day of the Tentacle\" was in the works at LucasArts Singapore before the sale of LucasArts to Disney in 2012. Though never officially approved, the game used a pseudo-3D art style and was nearly 80% complete, according to one person close to the project, but was shelved in the days before the closure of LucasArts.\n\"Remastered\".\nA remastered version of \"Day of the Tentacle\" was developed by Schafer and his studio, Double Fine Productions. The remaster was released on March 22, 2016, for OS X, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, and Windows, with a Linux version released at July 11 together with a mobile port for iOS. The PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita versions are cross-buy and also feature cross-save. An Xbox One port came in October 2020. The remastered game was released as a free PlayStation Plus title for the month of January 2017.\nSchafer credited both LucasArts and Disney for help in creating the remaster, which follows from a similar remastering of \"Grim Fandango\", as well by Double Fine, in January 2015. Schafer said when they originally were about to secure the rights to \"Grim Fandango\" from LucasArts to make the remaster, they did not originally have plans to redo the other LucasArts adventure games, but with the passionate response they got on the news of the \"Grim Fandango\" remaster, they decided to continue these efforts. Schafer described getting the rights to \"Day of the Tentacle\" a \"miracle\" though aided by the fact that many of the executives in the legal rights chain had fond memories of playing these games and helped to secure the rights. 2 Player Productions, which has worked before with Double Fine to document their game development process, also created a mini-documentary for \"Day of the Tentacle Remastered\", which included a visit to the Skywalker Ranch, where LucasArts games were originally developed, where much of the original concept art and digital files for the game and other LucasArts adventure games were archived.\n\"Day of the Tentacle Remastered\" retains its two-dimensional cartoon-style art, redrawn at a higher resolution for modern computers. The high resolution character art was updated by a team led by Yujin Keim with the consultation of Ahern and Chan. Keim's team used many of the original sketches of characters and assets from the two and emulated their style with improvements for modern graphics systems. Matt Hansen worked on recreating the background assets in high resolution. As with the \"Grim Fandango\" remaster, the player can switch back and forth between the original graphics and the high-resolution version. The game includes a more streamlined interaction menu, a command wheel akin to the approach used in \"Broken Age\", but the player can opt to switch back to the original interface. The game's soundtrack has been redone within MIDI adapted to work with the iMUSE system. There is an option to listen to commentary from the original creators, including Schafer, Grossman, Chan, McConnell, Ahern, and Bajakian. The remaster contains the fully playable version of the original \"Maniac Mansion\", though no enhancements have been made to that game-within-a-game.\n\"Day of the Tentacle Remastered\" has received positive reviews, with the PC version having an aggregate review score of 87/100 tallied by \"Metacritic\". Reviewers generally praised the game as having not lost its charm since its initial release, but found some aspects of the remastering to be lackluster. Richard Corbett for \"Eurogamer\" found the game \"every bit as well crafted now as it was in 1993\", but found the processes used to provide high-definition graphics from the original 16-bit graphics to making some of the required shortcuts taken in 1993 for graphics, such as background dithering and low animation framerates, more obvious on modern hardware. \"IGN\"s Jared Petty also found the remastered to still be enjoyable, and found the improvement on the graphics to be \"glorious\", but worried that the lack of a hint system, as was added in \"The Secret of Monkey Island\" remastered version, would put off new players to the game. Bob Mackey for \"USgamer\" found that while past remastered adventure games have highlighted how much has changed in gamers' expectations since the heyday of adventure games in the 1990s, \"Day of the Tentacle Remastered\" \"rises above these issues to become absolutely timeless\"."}
{"id": "8091", "revid": "1271857933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8091", "title": "Douglas Adams", "text": "Douglas Noel Adams (11 March 1952 \u2013 11 May 2001) was an English author, humourist, and screenwriter, best known as the creator of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" (\"HHGTTG\"). Originally a 1978 BBC radio comedy, \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" developed into a \"trilogy\" of six (or five, according to the author) books which sold more than 15\u00a0million copies in his lifetime. It was further developed into a television series, several stage plays, comics, a video game, and a 2005 feature film. Adams's contribution to UK radio is commemorated in The Radio Academy's Hall of Fame.\nAdams also wrote \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\" (1987) and \"The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul\" (1988), and co-wrote \"The Meaning of Liff\" (1983), \"The Deeper Meaning of Liff\" (1990) and \"Last Chance to See\" (1990). He wrote two stories for the television series \"Doctor Who\", including the unaired serial \"Shada\", co-wrote \"City of Death\" (1979), and served as script editor for its 17th season. He co-wrote the sketch \"Patient Abuse\" for the final episode of \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\". A posthumous collection of his selected works, including the first publication of his final (unfinished) novel, was published as \"The Salmon of Doubt\" in 2002.\nAdams was a self-proclaimed \"radical atheist\", an advocate for environmentalism and conservation, and a lover of fast cars, technological innovation, and the Apple Macintosh.\nEarly life.\nAdams was born in Cambridge, England, on 11 March 1952 to Christopher Douglas Adams (1927\u20131985), a management consultant and computer salesman, former probation officer and lecturer on probationary group therapy techniques, and nurse Janet (1927\u20132016), n\u00e9e Donovan. The family moved a few months after his birth to the East End of London, where his sister, Susan, was born three years later. His parents divorced in 1957; Douglas, Susan and their mother moved then to an RSPCA animal shelter in Brentwood, Essex, run by his maternal grandparents. Each parent remarried, giving Adams four half-siblings. A great-grandfather was the playwright Benjamin Franklin Wedekind.\nEducation.\nAdams attended Primrose Hill Primary School in Brentwood. At the age of nine, he passed the entrance exam for Brentwood School. He attended the prep school from 1959 to 1964, then the main school until December 1970. Adams was tall by the age of 12, and stopped growing at . His form master, Frank Halford, said that Adams's height had made him stand out and that he had been self-conscious about it. His ability to write stories made him well known in the school. Adams became the only student ever to be awarded a ten out of ten by Halford for creative writing \u2013 something he remembered for the rest of his life, particularly when facing writer's block.\nSome of his earliest writing was published at the school, such as a report on its photography club in \"The Brentwoodian\" in 1962, or spoof reviews in the school magazine \"Broadsheet\", edited by Paul Neil Milne Johnstone, who later became a character in \"The Hitchhiker's Guide\". Adams also designed the cover of one issue of the \"Broadsheet\", and had a letter and short story published in \"The Eagle\", the boys' comic, in 1965. A poem entitled \"A Dissertation on the task of writing a poem on a candle and an account of some of the difficulties thereto pertaining\" written by Adams in January 1970 at the age of 17, was discovered in a cupboard at the school in early 2014.\nOn the strength of an essay on religious poetry that discussed the Beatles and William Blake, Adams was awarded an Exhibition in English at St John's College, Cambridge (where his father had likewise been a student), going up in 1971. He wanted to join the Footlights, an invitation-only student comedy club that has acted as a hothouse for comic talent. He was not elected immediately as he had hoped, and started to write and perform in revues with Will Adams (no relation) and Martin Smith; they formed a group called \"Adams-Smith-Adams\". He became a member of the Footlights by 1973. Despite doing very little work \u2013 he recalled having completed three essays in three years \u2013 he graduated in 1974 with a 2:2 in English literature.\nCareer.\nWriting.\nAfter leaving university, Adams moved back to London, determined to break into TV and radio as a writer. An edited version of the \"Footlights Revue\" appeared on BBC2 television in 1974. A version of the Revue performed live in London's West End led to Adams being discovered by Monty Python's Graham Chapman. The two formed a brief writing partnership, earning Adams a writing credit in episode 45 of \"Monty Python\" for a sketch called \"Patient Abuse\". The pair also co-wrote the \"Marilyn Monroe\" sketch that appeared on the soundtrack album of \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\". Adams is one of only two people other than the original Python members to get a writing credit (the other being Neil Innes).\nAdams had two brief appearances in the fourth series of \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\". At the beginning of episode 42, \"The Light Entertainment War\", Adams is in a surgeon's mask (as Dr. Emile Koning, according to on-screen captions), pulling on gloves, while Michael Palin narrates a sketch that introduces one person after another but never gets started. At the beginning of episode 44, \"Mr. Neutron\", Adams is dressed in a pepper-pot outfit and loads a missile onto a cart driven by Terry Jones, who is calling for scrap metal (\"Any old iron...\"). The two episodes were broadcast in November 1974. Adams and Chapman also attempted non-Python projects, including \"Out of the Trees\".\nAt this point, Adams's career stalled; his writing style was unsuited to the then-current style of radio and TV comedy. To make ends meet, he took a series of odd jobs, including as a hospital porter, barn builder, and chicken shed cleaner. He was employed as a bodyguard by a Qatari family, who had made their fortune in oil.\nDuring this time, Adams continued to write and submit sketches, though few were accepted. In 1976, his career had a brief improvement when he wrote and performed \"Unpleasantness at Brodie's Close\" at the Edinburgh Fringe festival. By Christmas, work had dried up again, and a depressed Adams moved to live with his mother. The lack of writing work hit him hard, and low confidence became a feature of Adams's life: \"I have terrible periods of lack of confidence [...] I briefly did therapy, but after a while I realised it was like a farmer complaining about the weather. You can't fix the weather\u00a0\u2013 you just have to get on with it.\"\nSome of Adams's early radio work included sketches for \"The Burkiss Way\" in 1977 and \"The News Huddlines\". He also wrote, again with Chapman, the 20 February 1977 episode of \"Doctor on the Go\", a sequel to the \"Doctor in the House\" television comedy series. After the first radio series of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide\" became successful, Adams was made a BBC radio producer, working on \"Week Ending\" and a pantomime called \"Black Cinderella Two Goes East\". He left after six months to become the script editor for \"Doctor Who\".\nIn 1979, Adams and John Lloyd wrote scripts for two half-hour episodes of \"Doctor Snuggles\": \"The Remarkable Fidgety River\" and \"The Great Disappearing Mystery\" (episodes eight and twelve). John Lloyd was also co-author of two episodes from the original \"Hitchhiker\" radio series (\"Fit the Fifth\" and \"Fit the Sixth\", also known as \"Episode Five\" and \"Episode Six\"), as well as \"The Meaning of Liff\" and \"The Deeper Meaning of Liff\".\nWork on \"Doctor Who\".\nAdams sent the script for the \"HHGG\" pilot radio programme to the \"Doctor Who\" production office in 1978, and was commissioned to write \"The Pirate Planet\". He had also previously attempted to submit a potential film script, called \"Doctor Who and the Krikkitmen\", which later became his novel \"Life, the Universe and Everything\" (which in turn became the third \"Hitchhiker's Guide\" radio series). Adams then went on to serve as script editor on the show for its 17th season in 1979. Altogether, he wrote three \"Doctor Who\" serials starring Tom Baker as the Fourth Doctor:\nThe episodes authored by Adams are some of the few that were not originally novelised, as Adams would not allow anyone else to write them and asked for a higher price than the publishers were willing to pay. \"Shada\" was adapted as a novel by Gareth Roberts in 2012 and \"City of Death\" and \"The Pirate Planet\" by James Goss in 2015 and 2017 respectively.\nElements of \"Shada\" and \"City of Death\" were reused in Adams's later novel \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\", in particular, the character of Professor Chronotis. Big Finish Productions eventually remade \"Shada\" as an audio play starring Paul McGann as the Doctor. Accompanied by partially animated illustrations, it was webcast on the BBC website in 2003, and subsequently released as a two-CD set later that year. An omnibus edition of this version was broadcast on the digital radio station BBC7 on 10 December 2005.\nIn the \"Doctor Who\" 2012 Christmas episode \"The Snowmen\", writer Steven Moffat was inspired by a storyline that Adams pitched called \"The Doctor Retires\".\n\"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\".\n\"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" was a concept for a science-fiction comedy radio series pitched by Adams and radio producer Simon Brett to BBC Radio 4 in 1977. Adams came up with an outline for a pilot episode, as well as a few other stories (reprinted in Neil Gaiman's book \"\") that could be used in the series.\nAccording to Adams, the idea for the title occurred to him while he lay drunk in a field in Innsbruck, Austria, gazing at the stars. He was carrying a copy of the \"Hitch-hiker's Guide to Europe\", and it occurred to him that \"somebody ought to write a \"Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\"\".\nDespite the original outline, Adams was said to make up the stories as he wrote. He turned to John Lloyd for help with the final two episodes of the first series. Lloyd contributed bits from an unpublished science fiction book of his own, called \"GiGax\". Very little of Lloyd's material survived in later adaptations of \"Hitchhiker's\", such as the novels and the TV series. The TV series was based on the first six radio episodes, and sections contributed by Lloyd were largely re-written.\nBBC Radio 4 broadcast the first radio series weekly in the UK starting 8 March 1978, lasting until April. The series was distributed in the United States by National Public Radio. Following the success of the first series, another episode was recorded and broadcast, which was commonly known as the Christmas Episode. A second series of five episodes was broadcast one per night, during the week of 21\u201325 January 1980.\nWhile working on the radio series (and with simultaneous projects such as \"The Pirate Planet\") Adams developed problems keeping to writing deadlines that got worse as he published novels. Adams was never a prolific writer and usually had to be forced by others to do any writing. This included being locked in a hotel suite with his editor for three weeks to ensure that \"So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish\" was completed. He was quoted as saying, \"I love deadlines. I love the whooshing noise they make as they go by.\" Despite the difficulty with deadlines, Adams wrote five novels in the series, published in 1979, 1980, 1982, 1984, and 1992.\nThe books formed the basis for other adaptations, such as three-part comic book adaptations for each of the first three books, an interactive text-adventure computer game, and a photo-illustrated edition, published in 1994. This latter edition featured a 42 Puzzle designed by Adams, which was later incorporated into paperback covers of the first four \"Hitchhiker's\" novels (the paperback for the fifth re-used the artwork from the hardback edition).\nIn 1980, Adams began attempts to turn the first \"Hitchhiker's\" novel into a film, making several trips to Los Angeles, and working with Hollywood studios and potential producers. The next year, the radio series became the basis for a BBC television mini-series broadcast in six parts. When he died in 2001 in California, he had been trying again to get the film project started with Disney, which had bought the rights in 1998. The screenplay was rewritten by Karey Kirkpatrick and the \"Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" film was released in 2005.\nRadio producer Dirk Maggs had consulted with Adams, first in 1993, and later in 1997 and 2000 about creating a third radio series, based on the third novel in the \"Hitchhiker's\" series. They also discussed the possibilities of radio adaptations of the final two novels in the five-book \"trilogy\". As with the film, this project was realised only after Adams's death. The third series, \"The Tertiary Phase\", was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in September 2004 and was subsequently released on audio CD. With the aid of a recording of his reading of \"Life, the Universe and Everything\" and editing, Adams can be heard playing the part of Agrajag posthumously. \"So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish\" and \"Mostly Harmless\" made up the fourth and fifth radio series, respectively (on radio they were titled \"The Quandary Phase\" and \"The Quintessential Phase\") and these were broadcast in May and June 2005, and also subsequently released on Audio CD. The last episode in the last series (with a new, \"more upbeat\" ending) concluded with, \"The very final episode of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" by Douglas Adams is affectionately dedicated to its author.\"\n\"Dirk Gently\" series.\nBetween Adams's first trip to Madagascar with Mark Carwardine in 1985, and their series of travels that formed the basis for the radio series and non-fiction book \"Last Chance to See\", Adams wrote two other novels with a new cast of characters. \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\" was published in 1987, and was described by its author as \"a kind of ghost-horror-detective-time-travel-romantic-comedy-epic, mainly concerned with mud, music and quantum mechanics\".\nA sequel, \"The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul\", was published a year later. It was Adams's first original work since \"So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish.\" After the book tour, Adams set off on his round-the-world excursion, which supplied him with the material for \"Last Chance to See\". \"The Salmon of Doubt\" was incomplete when published posthumously.\nMusic.\nAdams played the guitar left-handed and had a collection of 24 left-handed guitars when he died (having received his first guitar in 1964). He also studied piano in the 1960s. Pink Floyd and Procol Harum had important influence on Adams's work. During his segment on music discussion programme \"Private Passions\", Adams remarked that he \"would have loved to have been a rock musician\".\nPink Floyd.\nAdams's official biography shares its name with the song \"Wish You Were Here\" by Pink Floyd. The opening section of \"Shine On You Crazy Diamond\" was featured in a section of the third episode of the original 1978 \"Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" radio series (broadcast only, cut from commercial releases). Adams was friends with Pink Floyd guitarist David Gilmour and, on Adams's 42nd birthday, he was invited to make a guest appearance at Pink Floyd's concert of 28 October 1994 at Earls Court in London, playing guitar on the songs \"Brain Damage\" and \"Eclipse\". Adams chose the name for Pink Floyd's 1994 album, \"The Division Bell\", by picking the words from the lyrics to one of its tracks, \"High Hopes\". Pink Floyd and the song \"Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun\" in particular, inspired Adams to create the rock band Disaster Area who appear in \"The Restaurant at the End of the Universe\", who planned to crash a space ship into a nearby star as a stunt during a concert. Gilmour also performed at Adams's memorial service in 2001, and what would have been Adams's 60th birthday party in 2012.\nComputer games and projects.\nAdams created an interactive fiction version of \"HHGG\" with Steve Meretzky from Infocom in 1984. In 1986 he participated in a week-long brainstorming session with the Lucasfilm Games team for the game \"\". Later he was also involved in creating \"Bureaucracy\" as a parody of events in his own life.\nAdams was a founder-director and Chief Fantasist of The Digital Village, a digital media and Internet company with which he created \"Starship Titanic\", a Codie award-winning and BAFTA-nominated adventure game, which was published in 1998 by Simon &amp; Schuster. Terry Jones wrote the accompanying book, entitled \"Douglas Adams' Starship Titanic\", since Adams was too busy with the computer game to do both. In April 1999, Adams initiated the h2g2 collaborative writing project, an experimental attempt at making \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" a reality, and at harnessing the collective brainpower of the internet community. It was hosted by BBC Online from 2001 to 2011.\nIn 1990, Adams wrote and presented a television documentary programme \"Hyperland\" which featured Tom Baker as a \"software agent\" (similar to the assistant pictured in Apple's Knowledge Navigator video of future concepts from 1987), and interviews with Ted Nelson, the co-inventor of hypertext and the person who coined the term. Adams was an early adopter and advocate of hypertext.\nPersonal beliefs and activism.\nAtheism and views on religion.\nAdams described himself as a \"radical atheist\", adding \"radical\" for emphasis so he would not be asked if he meant agnostic. He told American Atheists that this conveyed the fact that he really meant it. He imagined a sentient puddle who wakes up one morning and thinks, \"This is an interesting world I find myself in \u2013 an interesting hole I find myself in \u2013 fits me rather neatly, doesn't it? In fact it fits me staggeringly well, must have been made to have me in it!\" to express his disbelief in the fine-tuned universe argument for God.\nHe remained fascinated by religion because of its effect on human affairs. \"I love to keep poking and prodding at it. I've thought about it so much over the years that that fascination is bound to spill over into my writing.\"\nThe evolutionary biologist and atheist Richard Dawkins invited Adams to participate in his 1991 Royal Institution Christmas Lectures, where Dawkins calls Adams from the audience to read a passage from \"The Restaurant at the End of the Universe\" which satirises the absurdity of the thought that any one species would exist on Earth merely to serve as a meal to another species, such as humans. Dawkins also uses Adams's influence to exemplify arguments for non-belief in his 2006 book \"The God Delusion\". Dawkins dedicated the book to Adams, whom he jokingly called \"possibly [my] only convert\" to atheism and wrote on his death that \"Science has lost a friend, literature has lost a luminary, the mountain gorilla and the black rhino have lost a gallant defender.\"\nEnvironmental activism.\nAdams was also an environmental activist who campaigned on behalf of endangered species. This activism included the production of the non-fiction radio series \"Last Chance to See\", in which he and naturalist Mark Carwardine visited rare species such as the k\u0101k\u0101p\u014d and baiji, and the publication of a tie-in book of the same name. In 1992, this was made into a CD-ROM combination of audiobook, e-book and picture slide show. \nAdams and Mark Carwardine contributed the 'Meeting a Gorilla' passage from \"Last Chance to See\" to the book \"The Great Ape Project\". This book, edited by Paola Cavalieri and Peter Singer, launched a wider-scale project in 1993, which calls for the extension of moral equality to include all great apes, human and non-human.\nIn 1994, Adams participated in a climb of Mount Kilimanjaro while wearing a rhino suit for the British charity organisation Save the Rhino International. Puppeteer William Todd-Jones, who had originally worn the suit in the London Marathon to raise money and bring awareness to the group, also participated in the climb wearing a rhino suit; Adams wore the suit while travelling to the mountain before the climb began. About \u00a3100,000 was raised through that event, benefiting schools in Kenya and a black rhinoceros preservation programme in Tanzania. Adams was also an active supporter of the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund.\nSince 2003, Save the Rhino has held an annual Douglas Adams Memorial Lecture around the time of his birthday to raise money for environmental campaigns.\nTechnology and innovation.\nAdams bought his first word processor in 1982, having considered one as early as 1979. His first purchase was a Nexu. In 1983, when he and Jane Belson went to Los Angeles, he bought a DEC Rainbow. Upon their return to England, Adams bought an Apricot, then a BBC Micro and a Tandy 1000. In \"Last Chance to See\", Adams mentions his Cambridge Z88, which he had taken to Zaire on a quest to find the northern white rhinoceros.\nAdams's posthumously published work, \"The Salmon of Doubt\", features several articles by him on the subject of technology, including reprints of articles that originally ran in \"MacUser\", and in \"The Independent on Sunday\". In these, Adams claims that one of the first computers he ever saw was a Commodore PET, and that he had \"adored\" his Apple Macintosh (\"or rather my family of however many Macintoshes it is that I've recklessly accumulated over the years\") since he first saw one at Infocom's offices in Boston in 1984.\nAdams was a Macintosh user from the time they first came out in 1984 until his death in 2001. He was the first person to buy a Mac in Europe, the second being Stephen Fry. Adams was also an \"Apple Master\", celebrities whom Apple made into spokespeople for its products (others included John Cleese and Gregory Hines). Adams's contributions included a rock video that he created using the first version of iMovie with footage featuring his daughter Polly. The video was available on Adams's .Mac homepage. Adams installed and started using the first release of Mac OS X in the weeks leading up to his death. His last post to his own forum was in praise of Mac OS X and the possibilities of its Cocoa programming framework. He said it was \"awesome...\", which was also the last word he wrote on his site.\nAdams used email to correspond with Steve Meretzky in the early 1980s, during their collaboration on Infocom's version of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\". While living in New Mexico in 1993 he set up another e-mail address and began posting to his own USENET newsgroup, alt.fan.douglas-adams, and occasionally, when his computer was acting up, to the comp.sys.mac hierarchy. Challenges to the authenticity of his messages later led Adams to set up a message forum on his own website to avoid the issue. In 1996, Adams was a keynote speaker at the Microsoft Professional Developers Conference (PDC) where he described the personal computer as being a modelling device. The video of his keynote speech is archived on Channel 9.\nAdams was also a keynote speaker for the April 2001 Embedded Systems Conference in San Francisco, one of the major technical conferences on embedded system engineering.\nPersonal life.\nAdams moved to Upper Street, Islington in 1981 and to Duncan Terrace, a few minutes walk away, in the late 1980s.\nIn the early 1980s, Adams had a relationship with novelist Sally Emerson, who was separated from her husband at that time. Adams later dedicated his book \"Life, the Universe and Everything\" to Emerson. In 1981, Emerson returned to her husband, Peter Stothard, a contemporary of Adams at Brentwood School and later editor of \"The Times\". Adams was soon introduced by friends to Jane Belson with whom he later became romantically involved. Belson was the \"lady barrister\" mentioned in the jacket-flap biography printed in his books during the mid-1980s (\"He [Adams] lives in Islington with a lady barrister and an Apple Macintosh\"). The two lived in Los Angeles together during 1983, while Adams worked on an early screenplay adaptation of \"Hitchhiker's\". When the deal fell through, they moved back to London and after several separations (\"He is currently not certain where he lives, or with whom\") and a broken engagement, they married on 25 November 1991.\nAdams and Belson had one daughter together, Polly Jane Rocket Adams, born on 22 June 1994 shortly after Adams turned 42. In 1999, the family moved from London to Santa Barbara, California, where they lived until his death. Following the funeral, Jane Belson and Polly Adams returned to London. Belson died on 7 September 2011 of cancer, aged 59.\nDeath and legacy.\nAdams died of a heart attack due to undiagnosed coronary artery disease on 11 May 2001, aged 49, after resting from his regular workout at a private gym in Montecito, California. His funeral was held on 16 May in Santa Barbara. His ashes were placed in Highgate Cemetery in north London in June 2002. A memorial service was held on 17 September 2001 at St Martin-in-the-Fields church, Trafalgar Square, London. This became the first church service broadcast live on the web by the BBC.\nTwo days before Adams died, the Minor Planet Center announced the naming of asteroid 18610\u00a0Arthurdent, named after \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" protagonist. In 2005, the asteroid 25924\u00a0Douglasadams was named in his memory.\nIn May 2002, \"The Salmon of Doubt\" was published, containing many short stories, essays and letters as well as eulogies from Richard Dawkins, Stephen Fry (in the UK edition), Christopher Cerf (in the US edition), and Terry Jones (in the US paperback edition). It also includes eleven chapters of his unfinished novel, \"The Salmon of Doubt\", which was originally intended to become a new Dirk Gently novel but might have later become the sixth \"Hitchhiker\" novel.\nOther events after Adams's death included a webcast production of \"Shada\", allowing the complete story to be told, radio dramatisations of the final three books in the \"Hitchhiker's\" series and the completion of the film adaptation of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\". The film, released in 2005, posthumously credits Adams as a producer and several design elements \u2013 including a head-shaped planet seen near the end of the film \u2013 incorporated Adams's features.\nA 12-part radio series based on the Dirk Gently novels was announced in 2007.\nBBC Radio 4 also commissioned a third Dirk Gently radio series based on the incomplete chapters of \"The Salmon of Doubt\" and written by Kim Fuller; but this was dropped in favour of a BBC-TV series based on the two completed novels. A sixth \"Hitchhiker\" novel, \"And Another Thing...\", by \"Artemis Fowl\" author Eoin Colfer, was released on 12 October 2009 (the 30th anniversary of the first book), published with the support of Adams's estate. A BBC Radio 4 \"Book at Bedtime\" adaptation and an audio book soon followed.\nOn 25 May 2001, two weeks after Adams's death, his fans organised a tribute known as Towel Day, which has been observed every year since then.\nAn Apple Macintosh SE/30 once owned by Adams can be seen on display at The Centre for Computing History in Cambridge.\nIn 2018, John Lloyd presented an hour-long episode of the BBC Radio Four documentary \"Archive on 4\" discussing Adams's private papers, which are held at St John's College, Cambridge. The episode is available online.\nTravessa Douglas Adams, a street at in S\u00e3o Jos\u00e9, Santa Catarina, Brazil is named in Adams's honour.\nIn March 2021, Unbound announced a crowdfunder for \"42: the wildly improbable ideas of Douglas Adams\", on the 20th anniversary of his death, a book based on Adams's papers, edited by Kevin Jon Davies.\nThe annual Douglas Adams Memorial Lectures began in 2003.\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "8092", "revid": "782009", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8092", "title": "Drum and bass", "text": "Drum and bass (commonly abbreviated as DnB, D&amp;B, or D'n'B) is a genre of electronic dance music characterised by fast breakbeats (typically 165\u2013185 beats per minute) with heavy bass and sub-bass lines, samples, and synthesizers. The genre grew out of the UK's jungle scene in the 1990s. \nThe popularity of drum and bass at its commercial peak ran parallel to several other UK dance styles. A major influence was the original Jamaican dub and reggae sound that influenced jungle's bass-heavy sound. Another feature of the style is the complex syncopation of the drum tracks' breakbeat. Drum and bass subgenres include breakcore, ragga jungle, hardstep, darkstep, techstep, neurofunk, ambient drum and bass, liquid funk (also known as liquid drum and bass), jump up, drumfunk, sambass, and drill 'n' bass. Drum and bass has influenced other genres such as big beat, dubstep, trip hop and has been influenced by hip hop, house, ambient music, techno, jazz, rock and pop.\nDrum and bass is dominated by a relatively small group of record labels. Major international music labels had shown very little interest in the drum and bass scene until BMG Rights Management acquired RAM in February 2016. Since then, the genre has seen a significant growth in exposure. Whilst the origin of drum and bass music is in the UK, the genre has evolved considerably with many other prominent fanbases located all over the world.\nHistory.\n20th century.\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, a growing nightclub and overnight outdoor event culture gave birth to new genres in the rave scene including breakbeat hardcore, darkcore, and hardcore jungle, which combined sampled syncopated beats, or breakbeats, and other samples from a wide range of different musical genres and, occasionally, samples of music, dialogue and effects from films and television programmes. From as early as 1991, tracks were beginning to strip away some of the heavier sampling and \"hardcore noises\" and create more bassline and breakbeat led tracks. Some tracks increasingly took their influence from reggae and this style would become known as hardcore jungle (later to become simply jungle), whilst darkcore (with producers such as Goldie, Doc Scott, 4hero, and 2 Bad Mice) were experimenting with sounds and creating a blueprint for drum and bass, especially noticeable by late 1993.\nBy 1994, jungle had begun to gain mainstream popularity, and fans of the music (often referred to as junglists) became a more recognisable part of youth subculture. The genre further developed, incorporating and fusing elements from a wide range of existing musical genres, including the raggamuffin sound, dancehall, MC chants, dub basslines, and increasingly complex, heavily edited breakbeat percussion. Despite the affiliation with the ecstasy-fuelled rave scene, jungle also inherited associations with violence and criminal activity, both from the gang culture that had affected the UK's hip-hop scene and as a consequence of jungle's often aggressive or menacing sound and themes of violence (usually reflected in the choice of samples). However, this developed in tandem with the often positive reputation of the music as part of the wider rave scene and dancehall-based Jamaican music culture prevalent in London. By 1995, whether as a reaction to, or independently of this cultural schism, some jungle producers began to move away from the ragga-influenced style and create what would become collectively labelled, for convenience, as drum and bass.\nAs the genre became generally more polished and sophisticated technically, it began to expand its reach from pirate radio to commercial stations and gain widespread acceptance (circa 1995\u20131997). It also began to split into recognisable subgenres such as hardstep, jump up, ragga, techstep, and what was known at the time as intelligent. As more melodic and often jazz-influenced subgenres of drum and bass called atmospheric or intelligent (Blame and Blu Mar Ten) and jazzstep (4Hero, Roni Size) gained mainstream appeal, additional subgenres emerged including techstep in 1996, drawing influence from techno.\n21st century.\nThe emergence of related styles such as liquid funk in the 2000s brought a wave of new artists (Carlito &amp; Addiction, Solid State/DJ Dextrous, Subject 13 and Fellowship being amongst the early pioneers to champion the sound) incorporating new ideas and techniques, supporting continual evolution of the genre.\nAs of 2014, drum and bass makes frequent appearances in mainstream media and popular culture including in television, as well as being a major reference point for subsequent genres such as grime and dubstep, and producing successful artists including Chase &amp; Status, Netsky, Metrik, and Pendulum.\nIn 2021, \"Pitchfork\" noted a \"rising zoomer affinity\" for the genre in the 2020s.\n\"Purple Sneakers\" described a \"drum n' bass Renaissance\" occurring at the time of the publication of their articles in 2023.\nMusical features.\nDrum and bass incorporates a number of scenes and styles, from the highly electronic, industrial sounds of techstep to the use of conventional, acoustic instrumentation that characterise the more jazz-influenced end of the spectrum. The sounds of drum and bass are extremely varied due to the range of influences behind the music. Drum and bass could at one time be defined as a strictly electronic musical genre, with the only \"live\" element being the DJ's selection and mixing of records during a set. \"Live\" drum and bass using electric, electronic and acoustic instruments played by musicians on stage emerged over the ensuing years of the genre's development.\nInfluences.\nA very obvious and strong influence on jungle and drum and bass, thanks to the British African-Caribbean sound system scene, is the original Jamaican dub and reggae sound, with pioneers like King Tubby, Peter Tosh, Sly &amp; Robbie, Bill Laswell, Lee Perry, Mad Professor, Roots Radics, Bob Marley and Buju Banton heavily influencing the music. This influence has lessened with time, but is still evident, with many tracks containing ragga vocals.\nAs a musical style built around funk or syncopated rock and roll breaks, James Brown, Al Green, Marvin Gaye, Ella Fitzgerald, Gladys Knight &amp; the Pips, Billie Holiday, Aretha Franklin, Otis Redding, the Supremes, the Commodores, Jerry Lee Lewis, and even Michael Jackson acted as funk influences on the music. Jazz pioneer Miles Davis has been named as a possible influence. Blues artists such as Lead Belly, Robert Johnson, Charlie Patton, Muddy Waters and B. B. King have also been cited by producers as inspirations. Even modern avant-garde composers such as Henryk Gorecki have received mention. One of the most influential tracks in drum and bass history was \"Amen Brother\" by The Winstons, which contains a drum solo that has since become known as the \"Amen break\", which, after being extensively used in early hip hop music, went on to become the basis for the rhythms used in drum and bass.\nKevin Saunderson released a series of bass-heavy, minimal techno cuts as Reese/The Reese Project in the late '80s, which were hugely influential in drum and bass. One of his more famous basslines (Reese \u2013 \"Just Want Another Chance\", Incognito Records, 1988) was indeed sampled on Renegade's \"Terrorist\" and countless others since, being known simply as the 'Reese' bassline. He followed these up with equally influential (and bassline-heavy) tracks in the UK hardcore style as Tronik House in 1991\u20131992. Another Detroit artist who was important to the scene was Carl Craig. The sampled-up jazz break on Craig's \"Bug in the Bassbin\" was also influential on the newly emerging sound. DJs at the Heaven nightclub on \"Rage\" nights used to play it as fast as their Technics record decks would go, pitching it up in the process.\nBy the late 1980s and early 1990s, the tradition of breakbeat use in hip hop production had influenced the sound of breakbeat hardcore, which in turn led to the emergence of jungle, drum and bass, and other genres that shared the same use of broken beats. Drum and bass shares many musical characteristics with hip-hop, though it is nowadays mostly stripped of lyrics. Grandmaster Flash, Roger Troutman, Afrika Bambaata, Run DMC, Mac Dre, Public Enemy, Schooly D, N.W.A, Kid Frost, Wu-Tang Clan, Dr. Dre, Mos Def, Beastie Boys and the Pharcyde are very often directly sampled, regardless of their general influence.\nClearly, drum and bass has been influenced by other music genres, though influences from sources external to the electronic dance music scene perhaps lessened following the shifts from jungle to drum and bass, and through to so-called \"intelligent drum and bass\" and techstep. It still remains a fusion music style.\nSome tracks are illegally remixed and released on white label records (technically bootleg), often to acclaim. For example, DJ Zinc's remix of Fugees' \"Ready or Not\", also known as \"Fugee Or Not\", was eventually released with the Fugees' permission after talk of legal action, though ironically, the Fugees' version infringed Enya's copyright to an earlier song. White labels, along with dubplates, played an important part in drum and bass musical culture.\nDrum elements.\nSampling.\nThe Amen break was synonymous with early drum and bass productions but other samples have had a significant impact, including the Apache, Funky Drummer, \"Soul Pride\", \"Scorpio\" and \"Think (About It)\" breaks. Early pioneers often used Akai samplers and sequencers on the Atari ST to create their tracks.\nSynthesis.\nOf equal importance is the TR-808 kick drum, an artificially down-pitched or elongated bass drum sound sampled from Roland's classic TR-808 drum machine, and a sound which has been subject to an enormous amount of experimentation over the years.\nRhythm composition.\nMany drum and bass tracks have featured more than one sampled breakbeat in them and a technique of switching between two breaks after each bar developed. A more recent commonly used break is the \"Tramen\", which combines the Amen break, a James Brown funk breakbeat (\"Tighten Up\" or \"Samurai\" break) and an Alex Reece drum and bass breakbeat.\nThe relatively fast drum beat forms a canvas on which a producer can create tracks to appeal to almost any taste and often will form only a background to the other elements of the music. Syncopated breakbeats remain the most distinctive element as without these a high-tempo 4/4 dance track could be classified as techno or gabber.\nThe complex syncopation of the drum tracks' breakbeat is another facet of production on which producers can spend a very large amount of time. The Amen break is generally acknowledged to have been the most-used (and often considered the most powerful) break in drum and bass.\nBass elements.\nThe genre places great importance on the bassline, in this case a deep sub-bass musical pattern which can be felt physically through powerful sound systems due to the low-range frequencies favoured. There has been considerable exploration of different timbres in the bass line region, particularly within techstep. The bass lines most notably originate from sampled sources or synthesizers. Bass lines performed with a bass instrument, whether it is electric, acoustic or a double bass, are less common.\nAtmospheric elements.\nAtmospheric pads and samples may be added over the fundamental drum and bass to provide different feels. These have included \"light\" elements such as ambient pads as found in ambient electronica and samples of jazz and world musics, or \"dark\" elements such as dissonant pads and sci-fi samples to induce anxiety in the dancer.\nVocal and melodic elements.\nOld-school DnB usually included an MC providing vocals. Some styles (such as jazz-influenced DnB) also include melodic instruments soloing over the music.\nTempo.\nDrum and bass is usually between 160 and 180 BPM, in contrast to other breakbeat-based dance styles such as nu skool breaks, which maintain a slower pace at around 130\u2013140 BPM. A general upward trend in tempo has been observed during the evolution of drum and bass. The earliest forms of drum and bass clocked in at around 130 bpm in 1990/1991, speeding up to around 155\u2013165 BPM by 1993. Since around 1996, drum and bass tempos have predominantly stayed in the 170\u2013180 range. Recently, some producers have started to once again produce tracks with slower tempos (that is, in the 150-170 bpm range), but the mid-170s tempo is still a hallmark of the drum and bass sound.\nA track combining the same elements (broken beat, bass, production techniques) as a drum and bass track, but with a slower tempo (say 140 BPM), might not be drum and bass, but instead may qualify as a drum and bass-influenced breakbeat track.\nDrop.\nMany mixing points begin or end with a \"drop\". The drop is the point in a track where a switch of rhythm or bassline occurs and usually follows a recognisable build section and breakdown. Sometimes, the drop is used to switch between tracks, layering components of different tracks, as the two records may be simply ambient breakdowns at this point. Some DJs prefer to combine breakbeats, a more difficult exercise. Some drops are so popular that the DJ will \"rewind\" or \"reload\" or \"lift up\" the record by spinning it back and restarting it at the build. The drop is often a key point from the point of view of the dance floor, since the drum breaks often fade out to leave an ambient intro playing. When the beats re-commence they are often more complex and accompanied by a heavier bassline, encouraging the crowd to begin dancing.\nLive performance.\nDrum and bass exhibits a full frequency response which can sometimes only be fully appreciated on sound systems which can handle very low frequencies, including sub-bass frequencies that are often felt more than heard. As befits its name, the bass element of the music is particularly pronounced, with the comparatively sparse arrangements of drum and bass tracks allowing room for basslines that are deeper than most other forms of dance music. Drum and bass tracks are meticulously designed to create a hard-hitting emotional impact, with the drums complementing the bass to deliver a pulsating, powerful experience. Consequently, drum and bass parties are often advertised as featuring uncommonly loud and bass-heavy sound systems.\nThere are however many albums specifically designed for personal listening. The DJ mix is a particularly popular form of release, with a popular DJ or producer mixing live, or on a computer, a variety of tracks for personal listening. Additionally, there are many albums containing unmixed tracks, suited for home or car listening.\nDJ performance.\nAlthough this practice has declined in popularity, DJs are often accompanied by one or more MCs, drawing on the genre's roots in hip hop and reggae/ragga.\nMCs do not generally receive the same level of recognition as producer/DJs, and some events are specifically marketed as being MC-free. There are relatively few well-known drum and bass MCs, mainly based in London and Bristol, including Stevie Hyper D (deceased), the Ragga Twins, Dynamite MC, MC Skibadee(deceased) and MC Tali.\nLive instrument performance.\nMany musicians have adapted drum and bass to live performances, which feature instruments such as drums (acoustic or electronic), samplers, synthesizers, turntables, bass (either upright or electric) and guitars (acoustic or electric). Samplers have also been used live by assigning samples to a specific drum pad or key on drum pads or synthesizers. MCs are frequently featured in live performances.\nSubgenres.\nSmaller scenes within the drum and bass community have developed and the scene as a whole has become much more fractured into specific subgenres, which have been grouped into \"light\" (influenced by ambient, jazz, and world music) and \"heavy\" (influenced by industrial music, sci-fi, and anxiety) styles, including:\nGenres influenced by drum and bass.\nBorn around the same time as jungle, breakcore and digital hardcore share many of the elements of drum and bass and to the uninitiated, tracks from the extreme end of drum and bass may sound identical to breakcore thanks to speed, complexity, impact and maximum sonic density combined with musical experimentation. German drum and bass DJ The Panacea is also one of the leading digital hardcore artists. Raggacore resembles a faster version of the ragga-influenced jungle music of the 1990s, similar to breakcore but with more friendly dancehall beats (dancehall itself being a very important influence on drum and bass). Darkcore, a direct influence on drum and bass, was combined with influences of drum and bass itself leading to the creation of darkstep. There is considerable crossover from the extreme edges of drum and bass, breakcore, darkcore, digital hardcore and raggacore with fluid boundaries.\nIntelligent dance music (IDM) is a form of art music based on DnB and other electronic dance musics, exploring their boundaries using ideas from science, technology, contemporary classical music and progressive rock, often creating un-danceable, art gallery style music.\nGhettotech, a club music genre from Detroit, contains synth and basslines similar to drum and bass.\nIndustry.\nRecord labels.\nDrum and bass is dominated by a small group of record labels. These are mainly run by DJ-producers, such as London Elektricity's Hospital Records, Andy C and Scott Bourne's RAM, Goldie's Metalheadz, Fabio and Sarah Sandy's Creative Source Records, DJ Dextrous's King of the Jungle Records, Subversive Recordings and State of the Art Recordings, Kasra's Critical Music, DJ Friction's Shogun Audio, DJ Fresh's Breakbeat Kaos, Ed Rush &amp; Optical's Virus Recordings, Futurebound's Viper Recordings and DJ Hype, Pascal, NoCopyrightSounds and formerly DJ Zinc's True Playaz (known as Real Playaz as of 2006).\nPrior to 2016, the major international music labels such as Sony Music and Universal had shown very little interest in the drum and bass scene, with the exception of some notable signings, including Pendulum's \"In Silico\" LP to Warner. Roni Size's label played a big, if not the biggest, part in the creation of drum and bass with their dark, baseline sounds. V Recordings also played a large part of the development of drum and bass.\nBMG Rights Management acquired Ram Records in February 2016, making a strategic investment to help RAM Records (a London-based drum and bass record company co-owned by Andy C and his business partner Scott Bourne). RAM Records has been pushing the boundaries of drum and bass further into the mainstream with artists such as Chase and Status and Sub Focus.\nNow defunct labels include Rob Playford's Moving Shadow, running from 1990 until 2007, which played a pivotal role in the nineties drum and bass scene, releasing records by artists such as Omni Trio.\nFormats and distribution.\nPurchasing.\nOriginally drum and bass was mostly sold in 12-inch vinyl single format. With the emergence of drum and bass into mainstream music markets, more albums, compilations and DJ mixes started to be sold on CDs. As digital music became more popular, websites focused on electronic music, such as Beatport, began to sell drum and bass in digital format.\nDistributors (wholesale).\nThe bulk of drum and bass vinyl records and CDs are distributed globally and regionally by a relatively small number of companies such as SRD (Southern Record Distributors), ST Holdings, &amp; Nu Urban Music Limited.\nAs of 11 September 2012, Nu Urban ceased trading and RSM Tenon were instructed to assist in convening statutory meetings of members and creditors to appoint a liquidator. This left many labels short on sales, as Nu Urban were one of the main distributors for the vinyl market in the drum and bass scene.\nRegional scenes.\nAnglosphere.\nDespite its roots in the UK, which is still treated as the \"home\" of drum and bass, the style has firmly established itself around the world. There are strong scenes in other English-speaking countries including Australia, Canada, New Zealand, South Africa, and the United States.\nMedia presence.\nToday, drum and bass is widely promoted using different methods such as video sharing services like YouTube and Dailymotion, blogs, radio, and television, the latter being the most uncommon method. More recently, music networking websites such as SoundCloud and Mixcloud have become powerful tools for artist recognition, providing a vast platform that enables quick responses to new tracks. Record labels have adopted the use of podcasts. Prior to the rise of the internet, drum and bass was commonly broadcast over pirate radio.\nRadio.\nThe three highest-profile radio stations playing drum and bass shows are BBC Radio 1 with The Drum and Bass Show \u2013 formerly with Friction, who was replaced with Ren\u00e9 LaVice in 2017, simulcast in the US and Canada on Sirius XM, and DJ Hype on Kiss 100 in London. Fabio and Grooverider previously held a long-standing drum and bass show on Radio 1. Radio 1 also had the \"One in the Jungle\" show.\nThe BBC's Black music station BBC Radio 1Xtra used to feature the genre heavily, with DJ Bailey (show axed as of 29 August 2012) and Crissy Criss (show axed as of August 2014) as its advocates. The network also organises a week-long tour of the UK each year called Xtra Bass. London pirate radio stations have been instrumental in the development of drum and bass, with stations such as Kool FM (which continues to broadcast today having done so since 1991), Origin FM, Don FM (the only drum and bass pirate to have gained a temporary legal licence), Renegade Radio 107.2FM, Rude FM, Wax FM and Eruption among the most influential.\nAs of 2015, despite higher profile stations such as 1Xtra scaling back their drum and bass specialist coverage, the genre has made its way into UK top 10 charts with drum and bass inspired tracks from artists such as Rudimental and Sigma. Earlier in August 2014, before Crissy Criss' show was axed, the BBC held a whole prime time evening event dedicated to showcasing drum and bass by allowing four major labels to participate.\nAs of November 2014, six drum &amp; bass songs had reached the no.1 spot on the UK's top 40 chart, since the genre was first being played on the radio, around 1993. The first of these was in 2012. The fact that all six of these songs reached number 1 in only two years shows the increase in popularity and commercialisation of the genre in recent years. The artists who produced these songs are Sigma, Rudimental and DJ Fresh (all had two No.1 hits).\nInternet radio.\nInternet radio stations, acting in the same light as pirate stations, have also been an instrumental part in promoting drum and bass music; the majority of them funded by listener and artist donations.\nDrum and bass was supported by Ministry of Sound radio from the early 2000s until 2014 and later featuring Tuesday shows from labels such as Metalheadz, Fabio &amp; Grooverider, DJ Marky, Viper Recordings, Shogun Audio and Hospital Records. From September 2015, Ministry abruptly dropped all non-mainstream genres to focus on mainstream EDM, causing disappointment amongst the fans of the D&amp;B community.\nNorth American radio.\nIn Toronto since 1994, \"The Prophecy\" on 89.5 CIUT-FM with Marcus Visionary, DJ Prime and Mr. Brown, is North America's longest running jungle radio show.\nAlbum 88.5 (Atlanta) and C89.5fm (Seattle) have shows showcasing drum and bass.\nSeattle also has a long-standing electronica show known as \"Expansions\" on 90.3 FM KEXP. The rotating DJs include Kid Hops, whose shows are made up mostly of drum and bass. In Columbus, Ohio WCBE 90.5 has a two-hour electronic only showcase, \"All Mixed Up\", Saturday nights at 10 pm. At the same time, WUFM 88.7 plays its \"Electronic Playground\".\nTulsa, Oklahoma's rock station, 104.5 The Edge, has a two-hour show starting at 10 pm Saturday nights called \"Edge Essential Mix\", mixed by DJ Demko, showcasing electronic and drum and bass style. While the aforementioned shows in Ohio rarely play drum and bass, the latter plays the genre with some frequency.\nIn Tucson, Arizona, 91.3 FM KXCI has a two-hour electronic show known as \"Digital Empire\", Friday nights at 10 pm (MST). Resident DJ Trinidad showcases various styles of electronica, with the main focus being drum and bass, jungle and dubstep.\nIn Augusta, Georgia, Zarbizarre of the Cereal Killaz hosts a show called \"FreQuency\" on WHHD on Friday nights from 11 pm until 1 am, showcasing drum and bass during the second hour of the show.\nMagazines.\nThe best-known drum and bass publication was \"Kmag\" magazine (formerly called \"Knowledge Magazine\") before it went completely online in August 2009. Although it is still live, after 20 years Kmag ceased updating their site at the end of 2016. Kmag has announced a book to celebrate their 25th anniversary to be published in December 2019. Kmag's publishing arm, Vision, published Brian Belle-Fortune's \"All Crews Journeys Through Jungle Drum &amp; Bass Culture\" in 2004.\nOther publications include the longest-running drum and bass magazine worldwide, \"ATM Magazine\", and Austrian-based \"Resident\". London-based \"DJ\" magazine has also been running a widely respected drum and bass reviews page since 1994, written by Alex Constantinides, which many followers refer to when seeking out new releases to investigate. In 2012 he stopped writing the reviews, and they are now contributed by Whisky Kicks.\nMainstream acceptance.\nThe earliest mainstream drum and bass releases include Goldie's album \"Timeless\" from 1995. Other early examples include the Mercury Music Prize-winning album \"New Forms\" (1997) from Reprazent; 4hero's Mercury-nominated \"Two Pages\" from 1998; and then, in the 2000s, Pendulum's \"Hold Your Colour\" in 2005 (the best-selling drum and bass album).\nIn 2012, drum and bass achieved its first UK No. 1 single, \"Hot Right Now\", by DJ Fresh, which was one of the fastest-selling singles of 2012 at the time of release, launching the career of Rita Ora in the process.\nNumerous video games (such as Hudson Soft's \"Bomberman Hero\", Hi-Rez Studios' ', Electronic Arts' ', Rockstar Games' \"Grand Theft Auto\" series, and Sony's \"Wipeout\" series from \"Pure\" onward) have contained drum and bass tracks. Microsoft Studios' \"Forza Horizon 2, 3, 4 and 5\" feature a Hospital Records radio channel dedicated to the genre.\nThe genre has some popularity in film soundtracks. Hive's \"Ultrasonic Sound\" appeared on \"The Matrix\"s soundtrack, and the E-Z Rollers' song \"Walk This Land\" appeared in the film \"Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels\". Ganja Kru's \"Super Sharp Shooter\" can be heard in the 2006 film \"Johnny Was\".\nThe Channel 4 show \"Skins\" uses the genre in some episodes, notably in the first series' third episode, \"Jal\", where Shy FX and UK Apache's \"Original Nuttah\" was played in Fazer's club."}
{"id": "8094", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8094", "title": "Donald E Knuth", "text": ""}
{"id": "8095", "revid": "5908908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8095", "title": "Donald Knuth", "text": "Donald Ervin Knuth ( ; born January 10, 1938) is an American computer scientist and mathematician. He is a professor emeritus at Stanford University. He is the 1974 recipient of the ACM Turing Award, informally considered the Nobel Prize of computer science. Knuth has been called the \"father of the analysis of algorithms\".\nKnuth is the author of the multi-volume work \"The Art of Computer Programming\". He contributed to the development of the rigorous analysis of the computational complexity of algorithms and systematized formal mathematical techniques for it. In the process, he also popularized the asymptotic notation. In addition to fundamental contributions in several branches of theoretical computer science, Knuth is the creator of the TeX computer typesetting system, the related METAFONT font definition language and rendering system, and the Computer Modern family of typefaces.\nAs a writer and scholar, Knuth created the WEB and CWEB computer programming systems designed to encourage and facilitate literate programming, and designed the MIX/MMIX instruction set architectures. He strongly opposes the granting of software patents, and has expressed his opinion to the United States Patent and Trademark Office and European Patent Organisation.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nDonald Knuth was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to Ervin Henry Knuth and Louise Marie Bohning. He describes his heritage as \"Midwestern Lutheran German\". His father owned a small printing business and taught bookkeeping. While a student at Milwaukee Lutheran High School, Knuth thought of ingenious ways to solve problems. For example, in eighth grade, he entered a contest to find the number of words that the letters in \"Ziegler's Giant Bar\" could be rearranged to create; the judges had identified 2,500 such words. With time gained away from school due to a fake stomachache, Knuth used an unabridged dictionary and determined whether each dictionary entry could be formed using the letters in the phrase. Using this algorithm, he identified over 4,500 words, winning the contest. As prizes, the school received a new television and enough candy bars for all of his schoolmates to eat.\nEducation.\nKnuth received a scholarship in physics to the Case Institute of Technology (now part of Case Western Reserve University) in Cleveland, Ohio, enrolling in 1956. He also joined the Beta Nu Chapter of the Theta Chi fraternity. While studying physics at Case, Knuth was introduced to the IBM 650, an early commercial computer. After reading the computer's manual, Knuth decided to rewrite the assembly and compiler code for the machine used in his school because he believed he could do it better.\nIn 1958, Knuth created a program to help his school's basketball team win its games. He assigned \"values\" to players in order to gauge their probability of scoring points, a novel approach that \"Newsweek\" and \"CBS Evening News\" later reported on.\nKnuth was one of the founding editors of the Case Institute's \"Engineering and Science Review\", which won a national award as best technical magazine in 1959. He then switched from physics to mathematics, and received two degrees from Case in 1960: his Bachelor of Science, and simultaneously a master of science by a special award of the faculty, who considered his work exceptionally outstanding.\nAt the end of his senior year at Case in 1960, Knuth proposed to Burroughs Corporation to write an ALGOL compiler for the B205 for $5,500. The proposal was accepted and he worked on the ALGOL compiler between graduating from Case and going to Caltech. \nIn 1963, with mathematician Marshall Hall as his adviser, he earned a PhD in mathematics from the California Institute of Technology, with a thesis titled \"Finite Semifields and Projective Planes\".\nEarly work.\nIn 1963, after receiving his PhD, Knuth joined Caltech's faculty as an assistant professor.\nWhile at Caltech and after the success of the Burroughs B205 ALGOL compiler, he became consultant to Burroughs Corporation, joining the Product Planning Department. At Caltech he was operating as a mathematician but at Burroughs as a programmer working with the people he considered to have written the best software at the time in the ALGOL compiler for the B220 computer (successor to the B205).\nHe was offered a $100,000 contract to write compilers at Green Tree Corporation but turned it down making a decision not to optimize income and continued at Caltech and Burroughs.\nHe received a National Science Foundation Fellowship and Woodrow Wilson Foundation Fellowship but they had the condition that you could not do anything else but study as a graduate student so he would not be able to continue as a consultant to Burroughs. He chose to turn down the fellowships and continued with Burroughs.\nIn summer 1962, he wrote a FORTRAN compiler for Univac, but considered that \u201cI sold my soul to the devil\u201d to write a FORTRAN compiler.\nAfter graduating, Knuth returned to Burroughs in June 1961 but did not tell them he had graduated with a master's degree, rather than the expected bachelor's degree. Impressed by the ALGOL syntax chart, symbol table, recursive-descent approach and the separation of the scanning, parsing and emitting functions of the compiler Knuth suggested an extension to the symbol table that one symbol could stand for a string of symbols. This became the basis of the DEFINE in Burroughs ALGOL, which has since been adopted by other languages. However, some really disliked the idea and wanted DEFINE removed. The last person to think it was a terrible idea was Edsger Dijkstra on a visit to Burroughs.\nKnuth worked on simulation languages at Burroughs producing SOL \u2018Simulation Oriented Language\u2019, an improvement on the state-of-the-art, co-designed with J. McNeeley. He attended a conference in Norway in May, 1967 organised by the people who invented the Simula language. Knuth influenced Burroughs to use Simula.\nKnuth had a long association with Burroughs as a consultant from 1960 to 1968 until his move into more academic work at Stanford in 1969.\nIn 1962, Knuth accepted a commission from Addison-Wesley to write a book on computer programming language compilers. While working on this project, he decided that he could not adequately treat the topic without first developing a fundamental theory of computer programming, which became \"The Art of Computer Programming\". He originally planned to publish this as a single book, but as he developed his outline for the book, he concluded that he required six volumes, and then seven, to thoroughly cover the subject. He published the first volume in 1968.\nJust before publishing the first volume of \"The Art of Computer Programming\", Knuth left Caltech to accept employment with the Institute for Defense Analyses' Communications Research Division, then situated on the Princeton campus, which was performing mathematical research in cryptography to support the National Security Agency.\nIn 1967, Knuth attended a Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics conference and someone asked what he did. At the time, computer science was partitioned into numerical analysis, artificial intelligence, and programming languages. Based on his study and \"The Art of Computer Programming\" book, Knuth decided the next time someone asked he would say, \"Analysis of algorithms\".\nIn 1969, Knuth left his position at Princeton to join the Stanford University faculty, where he became Fletcher Jones Professor of Computer Science in 1977. He became Professor of The Art of Computer Programming in 1990, and has been emeritus since 1993.\nWritings.\nKnuth is a writer as well as a computer scientist.\n\"The Art of Computer Programming\" (\"TAOCP\").\nIn the 1970s, Knuth called computer science \"a totally new field with no real identity. And the standard of available publications was not that high. A lot of the papers coming out were quite simply wrong.\u00a0... So one of my motivations was to put straight a story that had been very badly told.\"\nFrom 1972 to 1973, Knuth spent a year at the University of Oslo among people such as Ole-Johan Dahl. This is where he had originally intended to write the seventh volume in his book series, which was to deal with programming languages. But Knuth had finished only the first two volumes when he came to Oslo, and thus spent the year on the third volume, next to teaching. The third volume came out just after Knuth returned to Stanford in 1973.\n\"Concrete Mathematics: A Foundation for Computer Science\" originated with an expansion of the mathematical preliminaries section of Volume 1 of \"TAoCP\". Knuth found that there were mathematical tools necessary for Volume 1, but missing from his repertoire, and decided that a course introducing those tools to computer science students would be useful. Knuth introduced the course at Stanford in 1970. Course notes developed by Oren Patashnik evolved into the 1988 text, with authors Ronald Graham, Knuth, and Patashnik. A second edition of \"Concrete Mathematics\" was published in 1994.\nBy 2011, Volume 4A of \"TAoCP\" had been published. In April 2020, Knuth said he anticipated that Volume 4 of \"TAoCP\" will have at least parts A through F. Volume 4B was published in October 2022.\nOther works.\nKnuth is also the author of \"Surreal Numbers\", a mathematical novelette on John Horton Conway's set theory construction of an alternate system of numbers. Instead of simply explaining the subject, the book seeks to show the development of the mathematics. Knuth wanted the book to prepare students for doing original, creative research.\nIn 1995, Knuth wrote the foreword to the book \"A=B\" by Marko Petkov\u0161ek, Herbert Wilf and Doron Zeilberger. He also occasionally contributes language puzzles to \"\".\nKnuth has delved into recreational mathematics. He contributed articles to the \"Journal of Recreational Mathematics\" beginning in the 1960s, and was acknowledged as a major contributor in Joseph Madachy's \"Mathematics on Vacation\".\nKnuth also appears in a number of Numberphile and Computerphile videos on YouTube, where he discusses topics from writing \"Surreal Numbers\" to why he does not use email.\nKnuth had proposed the name \"algorithmics\" as a better name for the discipline of computer science.\nWorks about his religious beliefs.\nIn addition to his writings on computer science, Knuth, a Lutheran, is also the author of \"3:16 Bible Texts Illuminated\", in which he examines the Bible by a process of systematic sampling, namely an analysis of chapter 3, verse 16 of each book. Each verse is accompanied by a rendering in calligraphic art, contributed by a group of calligraphers led by Hermann Zapf. Knuth was invited to give a set of lectures at MIT on the views on religion and computer science behind his 3:16 project, resulting in another book, \"Things a Computer Scientist Rarely Talks About\", where he published the lectures \"God and Computer Science\".\nOpinion on software patents.\nKnuth strongly opposes granting software patents to trivial solutions that should be obvious, but has expressed more nuanced views for nontrivial solutions such as the interior-point method of linear programming. He has expressed his disagreement directly to both the United States Patent and Trademark Office and European Patent Organisation.\nProgramming.\nDigital typesetting.\nIn the 1970s, the publishers of TAOCP abandoned Monotype in favor of phototypesetting. Knuth became so frustrated with the inability of the latter system to approach the quality of the previous volumes, which were typeset using the older system, that he took time out to work on digital typesetting and created TeX and Metafont.\nLiterate programming.\nWhile developing TeX, Knuth created a new methodology of programming, which he called literate programming, because he believed that programmers should think of programs as works of literature:\nKnuth embodied the idea of literate programming in the WEB system. The same WEB source is used to \"weave\" a TeX file, and to \"tangle\" a Pascal source file. These in their turn produce a readable description of the program and an executable binary respectively. A later iteration of the system, CWEB, replaces Pascal with C, C++, and Java.\nKnuth used WEB to program TeX and METAFONT, and published both programs as books, both originally published the same year: \"TeX: The Program\" (1986); and \"METAFONT: The Program\" (1986). Around the same time, LaTeX, the now-widely adopted macro package based on TeX, was first developed by Leslie Lamport, who later published its first user manual in 1986.\nPersonal life.\nDonald Knuth married Nancy Jill Carter on 24 June 1961, while he was a graduate student at the California Institute of Technology. They have two children: John Martin Knuth and Jennifer Sierra Knuth.\nKnuth gives informal lectures a few times a year at Stanford University, which he calls \"Computer Musings\". He was a visiting professor at the Oxford University Department of Computer Science in the United Kingdom until 2017 and an Honorary Fellow of Magdalen College.\nKnuth is an organist and a composer. He and his father served as organists for Lutheran congregations. Knuth and his wife have a 16-rank organ in their home. In 2016 he completed a piece for organ, \"Fantasia Apocalyptica\", which he calls a \"translation of the Greek text of the Revelation of Saint John the Divine into music\". It was premi\u00e8red in Sweden on January 10, 2018.\nChinese name.\nKnuth's Chinese name is Gao Dena (). He was given this name in 1977 by Frances Yao shortly before making a three-week trip to China. In the 1980 Chinese translation of Volume 1 of \"The Art of Computer Programming\" (), Knuth explains that he embraced his Chinese name because he wanted to be known by the growing numbers of computer programmers in China at the time. In 1989, his Chinese name was placed atop the \"Journal of Computer Science and Technology\" header, which Knuth says \"makes me feel close to all Chinese people although I cannot speak your language\".\nHumor.\nKnuth used to pay a finder's fee of $2.56 for any typographical errors or mistakes discovered in his books, because \"256 pennies is one hexadecimal dollar\", and $0.32 for \"valuable suggestions\". According to an article in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's \"Technology Review\", these Knuth reward checks are \"among computerdom's most prized trophies\". Knuth had to stop sending real checks in 2008 due to bank fraud, and now gives each error finder a \"certificate of deposit\" from a publicly listed balance in his fictitious \"Bank of San Serriffe\".\nHe once warned a correspondent, \"Beware of bugs in the above code; I have only proved it correct, not tried it.\"\nKnuth published his first \"scientific\" article in a school magazine in 1957 under the title \"The Potrzebie System of Weights and Measures\". In it, he defined the fundamental unit of length as the thickness of \"Mad\" No. 26, and named the fundamental unit of force \"whatmeworry\". \"Mad\" published the article in issue No. 33 (June 1957).\nTo demonstrate the concept of recursion, Knuth intentionally referred \"Circular definition\" and \"Definition, circular\" to each other in the index of \"The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 1\".\nThe preface of \"Concrete Mathematics\" has the following paragraph:\nAt the TUG 2010 Conference, Knuth announced a satirical XML-based successor to TeX, titled \"iTeX\" (, performed with a bell ringing), which would support features such as arbitrarily scaled irrational units, 3D printing, input from seismographs and heart monitors, animation, and stereophonic sound.\nAwards and honors.\nIn 1971, Knuth received the first ACM Grace Murray Hopper Award. He has received various other awards, including the Turing Award, the National Medal of Science, the John von Neumann Medal, and the Kyoto Prize.\nKnuth was elected a Distinguished Fellow of the British Computer Society (DFBCS) in 1980 in recognition of his contributions to the field of computer science.\nIn 1990, he was awarded the one-of-a-kind academic title \"Professor of The Art of Computer Programming\"; the title has since been revised to \"Professor Emeritus of The Art of Computer Programming\".\nKnuth was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1975. He was also elected a member of the National Academy of Engineering in 1981 for organizing vast subject areas of computer science so that they are accessible to all segments of the computing community. In 1992, he became an associate of the French Academy of Sciences. Also that year, he retired from regular research and teaching at Stanford University in order to finish \"The Art of Computer Programming\". He was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 2003.\nKnuth was elected as a Fellow (first class of Fellows) of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics in 2009 for his outstanding contributions to mathematics. He is a member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters. In 2012, he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society and a member of the American Philosophical Society. Other awards and honors include:\nPublications.\nA short list of his publications include:\n\"The Art of Computer Programming\":\n\"Computers and Typesetting\" (all books are hardcover unless otherwise noted):\nBooks of collected papers:\nOther books:"}
{"id": "8096", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8096", "title": "Donald E. Knuth", "text": ""}
{"id": "8097", "revid": "1271607792", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8097", "title": "Dairy product", "text": "Dairy products or milk products, also known as lacticinia, are food products made from (or containing) milk. The most common dairy animals are cow, water buffalo, nanny goat, and ewe. Dairy products include common grocery store food around the world such as yogurt, cheese, milk and butter. A facility that produces dairy products is a \"dairy\". Dairy products are consumed worldwide to varying degrees. Some people avoid some or all dairy products because of lactose intolerance, veganism, environmental concerns, other health reasons or beliefs.\nTypes of dairy product.\nMilk.\nMilk is produced after optional homogenization or pasteurization, in several grades after standardization of the fat level, and possible addition of the bacteria \"Streptococcus lactis\" and \"Leuconostoc citrovorum\". Milk can be broken down into several different categories based on type of product produced, including cream, butter, cheese, infant formula, and yogurt.\nMilk varies in fat content. Skim milk is milk with zero fat, while whole milk products contain fat.\nMilk is an ingredient in many confectioneries. Milk can be added to chocolate to produce milk chocolate.\nButter.\nButter, mostly milk fat, produced by churning cream\nFermented.\nFermented milk products include:\nYogurt.\nYogurt, milk fermented by thermophilic bacteria, mainly \"Streptococcus salivarius\" ssp. \"thermophilus\" and \"Lactobacillus delbrueckii\" ssp. \"bulgaricus\" sometimes with additional bacteria, such as \"Lactobacillus acidophilus\"\nCheese.\nCheese, produced by coagulating milk, separating curds from whey, and letting it ripen, generally with bacteria, and sometimes also with certain molds.\nConsumption patterns worldwide.\nRates of dairy consumption vary widely worldwide. High-consumption countries consume more than per capita per year. These countries are: Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Costa Rica, most European countries, Israel, Kyrgyzstan, Canada, the United States and Pakistan. Medium-consumption countries consume to 150\u00a0kg per capita per year. These countries are: India, Iran, Japan, Kenya, Mexico, Mongolia, New Zealand, North and Southern Africa, most of the Middle East, and most of Latin America and the Caribbean. Low-consumption countries consume under 30\u00a0kg per capita per year. These countries are: Senegal, most of Central Africa, and most of East and Southeast Asia.\nLactose levels.\nFor those with some degree of lactose intolerance, considering the amount of lactose in dairy products can be important to health.\nIntolerance and health research.\nDairy products may upset the digestive system in individuals with lactose intolerance or a milk allergy. People who experience lactose intolerance usually avoid milk and other lactose-containing dairy products, which may cause mild side effects, such as abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea, gas, and nausea. Such individuals may use non-dairy milk substitutes.\nCancer.\nThe American Institute for Cancer Research (AICR), World Cancer Research Fund International (WCRF), Cancer Council Australia (CCA) and Cancer Research UK have stated that there is strong evidence that consumption of dairy products decreases risk of colorectal cancer. The AICR, WCRF, CCA and Prostate Cancer UK have stated that there is limited but suggestive evidence that dairy products increase risk of prostate cancer. The American Cancer Society (ACS) have stated that because dairy products \"may lower the risk of some cancers and possibly increase the risk of others, the ACS does not make specific recommendations on dairy food consumption for cancer prevention.\"\nIt has been suggested that consumption of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) in dairy products could increase cancer risk, particularly prostate cancer. However, a 2018 review by the Committee on Carcinogenicity of Chemicals in Food, Consumer Products and the Environment (COC) concluded that there is \"insufficient evidence to draw any firm conclusions as to whether exposure to dietary IGF-1 is associated with an increased incidence of cancer in consumers\". The COC also stated it is unlikely that there would be absorption of intact IGF-1 from food by most consumers.\nA 2019 review concluded that higher-quality research was needed to characterise valid associations between dairy consumption and risk of and/or cancer-related mortality. A 2021 umbrella review found strong evidence that consumption of dairy products decreases risk of colorectal cancer. Fermented dairy is associated with significantly decreased bladder cancer and colorectal cancer risk. A 2023 review found no association between consumption of dairy products and breast cancer.\nThe British Dietetic Association have described the idea that milk promotes hormone related cancerous tumour growth as a myth, stating \"no link between dairy containing diets and risk of cancer or promoting cancer growth as a result of hormones\". In 2024, Cancer Research UK stated \"there is no reliable evidence that casein or hormones in dairy causes cancer in people\".\nCardiovascular disease.\nThe American Medical Association (AMA) recommends that people replace full-fat dairy products with nonfat and low-fat dairy products. In 2017, the AMA stated that there is no high-quality clinical evidence that cheese consumption lowers the risk of cardiovascular disease. In 2021, they stated that \"taken together, replacing full-fat dairy products with nonfat and low-fat dairy products and other sources of unsaturated fat shifts the composition of dietary patterns toward higher unsaturated to saturated fat ratios that are associated with better cardiovascular health\".\nIn 2017, the National Heart Foundation of New Zealand published an umbrella review which found an \"overall neutral effect of dairy on cardiovascular risk for the general population\". Their position paper stated that \"the evidence overall suggests dairy products can be included in a heart-healthy eating pattern and choosing reduced-fat dairy over full-fat dairy reduces risk for some, but not all, cardiovascular risk factors\".\nIn 2019 the National Heart Foundation of Australia published a position statement on full fat dairy products, \"Based on current evidence, there is not enough evidence to recommend full fat over reduced fat products or reduced fat over full fat products for the general population. For people with elevated cholesterol and those with existing coronary heart disease, reduced fat products are recommended.\" The position statement also noted that the \"evidence for milk, yoghurt and cheese does not extend to butter, cream, ice-cream and dairy-based desserts; these products should be avoided in a heart healthy eating pattern\".\nRecent reviews of randomized controlled trials have found that dairy intake from cheese, milk and yogurt does not have detrimental effects on markers of cardiometabolic health.\nOther.\nConsumption of dairy products such as low-fat and whole milk have been associated with an increased acne risk, however, there is no conclusive evidence. Fermented and low-fat dairy products are associated with a decreased risk of diabetes. Consumption of dairy products are also associated with a decreased risk of gout.\nA 2023 review found that higher intake of dairy products is significantly associated with a lower risk of inflammatory bowel disease.\nAvoidance on principle.\nSome groups avoid dairy products for non-health-related reasons. Some religions restrict or do not allow the consumption of dairy products. For example, some scholars of Jainism advocate not consuming any dairy products because dairy is perceived to involve violence against cows. Orthodox Judaism requires that meat and dairy products not be served at the same meal, served or cooked in the same utensils, or stored together, as prescribed in Deuteronomy 14:21.\nVeganism is the avoidance of all animal products, including dairy products, most often due to the ethics regarding how dairy products are produced. The ethical reasons for avoiding meat and dairy products include how dairy is produced, how the animals are handled, and the environmental effect of dairy production. According to a report of the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization in 2010 the dairy sector accounted for 4 percent of global human-made greenhouse gas emissions.\nGrowing awareness of dairy products' environmental impact, specifically greenhouse gas emissions, has led to many people reducing or avoiding dairy. In the EU, dairy is responsible for 27% of all diet related emissions, on average, while plant-based milks cause 2.5\u20134.5 times fewer emissions."}
{"id": "8099", "revid": "43512911", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8099", "title": "Dave Grohl", "text": "David Eric Grohl (; born January 14, 1969) is an American musician. He founded the rock band Foo Fighters, of which he is the lead singer, guitarist, and principal songwriter. From 1990 to 1994, he was the drummer of the grunge band Nirvana.\nIn 1986, at age 17, Grohl joined the punk rock band Scream, replacing drummer Kent Stax. After Scream broke up in 1990, Grohl became the drummer for Nirvana. He first appeared on the band's second album, \"Nevermind\" (1991). After the 1994 suicide of Kurt Cobain, Nirvana disbanded and Grohl formed Foo Fighters as a one-man project. After he released the album \"Foo Fighters\" in 1995, he assembled a full band to tour and record under the Foo Fighters name. They have since released 11 studio albums.\nGrohl is also the drummer and co-founder of the rock supergroup Them Crooked Vultures, and has recorded and toured with Queens of the Stone Age and Tenacious D. He has organized side projects Late!, which released the album \"Pocketwatch\", and Probot. Grohl began directing Foo Fighters music videos in 1997. He released his debut documentary, \"Sound City\", in 2013, then the 2014 documentary miniseries \"Sonic Highways\" and the 2021 documentary film \"What Drives Us\". In 2021, Grohl released an autobiography, \"The Storyteller: Tales of Life and Music\". In 2022, he and the Foo Fighters starred as themselves in the comedy horror film \"Studio 666\".\nIn 2016, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Grohl the 27th-best drummer of all time. Grohl was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as part of Nirvana in 2014 and as a member of Foo Fighters in 2021.\nEarly life.\nGrohl was born in Warren, Ohio, on January 14, 1969, the son of teacher Virginia Jean (n\u00e9e Hanlon) and newswriter James Harper Grohl. He is of German, Slovak (on his father's side), Irish, and English (on his mother's side) descent. His father, James, was a journalist and the special assistant to U.S. Senator Robert Taft Jr. James was described as \"a talented political observer who possessed the ability to call every major election with uncanny accuracy\". When he was a child, Grohl's family moved to Springfield, Virginia. When he was seven, his parents divorced, and he was subsequently raised by his mother. At the age of 12, he began learning to play guitar. He grew tired of lessons and instead taught himself, eventually playing in bands with friends. He said, \"I was going in the direction of faster, louder, darker while my sister, Lisa, three years older, was getting seriously into new wave territory. We'd meet in the middle sometimes with Bowie and Siouxsie and the Banshees.\"\nAt 13, Grohl and his sister spent the summer at their cousin Tracey's house in Evanston, Illinois. Tracey introduced them to punk rock by taking the pair to shows by a variety of punk bands. His first concert was Naked Raygun at The Cubby Bear in Chicago in 1982. Grohl recalled, \"From then on we were totally punk. We went home and bought \"Maximumrocknroll\" and tried to figure it all out.\" In Virginia, he attended Thomas Jefferson High School as a freshman, and was elected class vice president. In that capacity, he managed to play pieces of songs by punk bands like Circle Jerks and Bad Brains over the school intercom before his morning announcements. His mother decided he should transfer to Bishop Ireton High School in Alexandria because his cannabis use was lowering his grades. He stayed there for two years, beginning with a repeat of his first year. After his second year, he transferred yet again to Annandale High School. While in high school, he played in several local bands, including a stint as guitarist in a band called Freak Baby, and taught himself to play drums. When Freak Baby fired its bass player and reshuffled its lineup, Grohl switched to drums. The reconstituted band renamed itself Mission Impossible.\nGrohl said he did not take formal drum lessons; instead, he taught himself how to play the drums by listening to Rush and punk rock. Rush drummer Neil Peart was an early influence: \"When I got \"2112\" when I was eight years old, it fucking changed the direction of my life. I heard the drums. It made me want to become a drummer.\" During his developing years as a drummer, Grohl cited John Bonham as his greatest influence, and eventually had Bonham's three-rings symbol tattooed on his right shoulder. Mission Impossible rebranded themselves Fast before breaking up, after which Grohl joined the hardcore punk band Dain Bramage in December 1985. In March 1987, Dain Bramage ended when Grohl quit without warning to join Scream, having produced the \"I Scream Not Coming Down\" LP. Many of Grohl's early influences were at the , a music venue in Washington, D.C. In April 2010, he said, \"I went to the 9:30 Club hundreds of times. I was always so excited to get there, and I was always bummed when it closed. I spent my teenage years at the club and saw some shows that changed my life.\"\nCareer.\nScream (1986\u20131990).\nAs a teenager in Washington, D.C., Grohl briefly contemplated joining Gwar, a shock rock band that was seeking a drummer.\nAt age 17, Grohl auditioned with local Washington, D.C., favorites Scream to fill the vacancy left by the departure of drummer Kent Stax. In order to be considered for the position, Grohl lied about his age, claiming he was older. To Grohl's surprise, the band asked him to join, so he dropped out of high school in his junior year. He has been quoted as saying, \"I was 17 and extremely anxious to see the world, so I did it.\"\nOver the next four years, Grohl toured extensively with Scream, recording a live album (their show of May 4, 1990, in Alzey, Germany, being released by Tobby Holzinger as \"Your Choice Live Series Vol.10\") and two studio albums, \"No More Censorship\" and \"Fumble\", on which Grohl penned and sang vocals on the song \"Gods Look Down\". During a Toronto stop on their 1987 tour, Grohl played drums for Iggy Pop at a CD release party held at famed club the El Mocambo. In 1990, Scream unexpectedly disbanded midtour following the departure of bassist Skeeter Thompson.\nNirvana (1990\u20131994).\nWhile playing in Scream, Grohl became a fan of the Melvins and eventually befriended them. During a 1990 tour stop on the West Coast, Melvins guitarist Buzz Osborne took his friends Kurt Cobain and Krist Novoselic, both then with Nirvana, to see a Scream performance. Following the breakup of Scream, Grohl called Osborne for advice. Osborne informed him that Nirvana was seeking a drummer, and gave Grohl the phone numbers of Cobain and Novoselic, who invited Grohl to Seattle to audition. Grohl passed the audition and soon joined the band. In October 2010, Grohl told \"Q\", \"I remember being in the same room with them and thinking, 'What? \"That\"'s Nirvana? Are you kidding?' Because on their record cover they looked like psycho lumberjacks... I was like, 'What, that little dude and that big motherfucker? You're kidding me'.\"\nWhen Grohl joined Nirvana, the band had already recorded several demos for the follow-up to their debut album \"Bleach\", and had spent time recording with producer Butch Vig in Wisconsin. Initially, the plan was to release the album on Sub Pop, but Nirvana received a great deal of interest based on the demos. Grohl spent the initial months with Nirvana traveling to various labels as the band shopped for a deal, eventually signing with DGC Records. In the spring of 1991, the band entered Sound City Studios in Los Angeles to record \"Nevermind\", which is depicted in Grohl's 2013 documentary \"Sound City\".\n\"Nevermind\" (1991) exceeded all expectations and became a worldwide commercial success. At the same time, Grohl was compiling and recording his own material, which he released on a cassette called \"Pocketwatch\" in 1992 on indie label Simple Machines. Rather than using his own name, Grohl released the cassette under the pseudonym \"Late!\"\nIn the later years with Nirvana, Grohl's songwriting contributions to the band increased. In Grohl's initial months in Olympia, Washington, Cobain overheard him working on a song called \"Color Pictures of a Marigold\", and the two subsequently worked on it together. Grohl later recorded the song for the \"Pocketwatch\" cassette. Grohl said in a 2014 episode of \"\" that Cobain reacted by kissing him upon first hearing a demo of \"Alone + Easy Target\" that Grohl recently recorded.\nDuring the sessions for \"In Utero\", Nirvana decided to re-record \"Color Pictures of a Marigold\" and released this version as a B-side on the \"Heart-Shaped Box\" single, titled simply \"Marigold\". Grohl also contributed the main guitar riff for \"Scentless Apprentice\". Cobain said in a late 1993 interview with MTV that he initially thought the riff was \"kind of boneheaded\", but was gratified at how the song developed, a process captured in part in a demo on the Nirvana box set \"With the Lights Out\". Cobain said that he was excited at the possibility of having Novoselic and Grohl contribute more to the band's songwriting.\nPrior to Nirvana's 1994 European tour, the band scheduled session time at Robert Lang Studios in Seattle to work on demos. For most of the three-day session, Cobain was absent, so Novoselic and Grohl worked on demos of their own songs. They completed several of Grohl's songs, including future Foo Fighters songs \"Exhausted\", \"Big Me\", \"February Stars\", and \"Butterflies\". Cobain arrived on the third day, and the band recorded a demo of \"You Know You're Right\". It was Nirvana's final studio recording before the suicide of Kurt Cobain on April 5, 1994. Two decades later, on April 10, 2014, Grohl was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Nirvana.\nFoo Fighters (1994\u2013present).\nInitial post-Nirvana activity.\nFollowing Cobain's suicide in April 1994, Grohl went into isolation and retreated for several months, unsure what to do next. He ended up leaving Seattle entirely, winding up in County Kerry, Ireland. In a 2022 interview with \"The Pit\", Grohl noted:\nIn October 1994, he scheduled studio time at Robert Lang Studios and quickly recorded a fifteen-track demo. With the exception of a single guitar part on \"X-Static\" played by Greg Dulli of the Afghan Whigs, Grohl performed all of the instruments himself.\nGrohl wondered if his future might be in drumming for other bands. In November, Grohl took a brief turn with Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, including a performance on \"Saturday Night Live\". He declined an invitation to become Petty's permanent drummer. Grohl was also rumored as a possible replacement for Pearl Jam drummer Dave Abbruzzese and performed with the band for a song or two at three shows during Pearl Jam's March 1995 Australian tour. However, by then, Pearl Jam had already settled on ex-Red Hot Chili Peppers drummer Jack Irons, and Grohl had other solo plans.\n1994\u20131996.\nAfter his demo received interest from major labels, Grohl was signed by Gary Gersh, Nirvana's A&amp;R rep-turned-president of Capitol Records. Grohl did not want the effort to be considered the start of a solo career, so he recruited other band members: former Germs and touring Nirvana guitarist Pat Smear and two members of the recently disbanded Sunny Day Real Estate: William Goldsmith (drums) and Nate Mendel (bass). He and Novoselic decided against Novoselic joining; Grohl said it would have felt \"really natural\" for them to work together again, but would have been uncomfortable for the other band members and placed more pressure on Grohl. Grohl's demo was remixed by Rob Schnapf and Tom Rothrock and released in July 1995 as Foo Fighters' self-titled debut album. During a break between tours, the band entered the studio and recorded a cover of Gary Numan's \"Down in the Park\". In February 1996, Grohl and his then-wife Jennifer Youngblood made a brief cameo appearance on \"The X-Files\" third-season episode \"Pusher\".\nAfter touring for the self-titled album for more than a year, Grohl returned home and began work on the soundtrack to the 1997 movie \"Touch\". Grohl performed all of the instruments and vocals himself, save for vocals from Veruca Salt singer Louise Post on the title track, keyboards by Barrett Jones (who also co-produced the record) on one track, and vocals and guitar by X's John Doe on \"This Loving Thing (Lynn's Song)\". Grohl completed the recording in two weeks, and immediately joined Foo Fighters to work on their follow-up.\nDuring the initial sessions for Foo Fighters' second album, tension emerged between Grohl and drummer Goldsmith. Goldsmith said, \"Dave had me do 96 takes of one song, and I had to do 13 hours' worth of takes on another one...It just seemed that everything I did wasn't good enough for him, or anyone else\". Goldsmith also believed that Capitol and producer Gil Norton wanted Grohl to drum on the album. With the album seemingly complete, Grohl headed home to Virginia with a copy of the rough mixes and found himself unhappy with the results. He wrote and recorded a few new songs, \"Walking After You\" and the hit single \"Everlong\", alone at a studio in Washington, D.C. Inspired by the session, Grohl opted to move the band, without Goldsmith's knowledge, to Los Angeles to re-record most of the album with Grohl on drums. After the sessions were complete, Goldsmith announced his departure from the band, and was replaced by Former Alanis Morissette drummer Taylor Hawkins. Grohl later expressed regret, and said, \"There were a lot of reasons it didn't work out, but there was also a part of me that was like, you know, I don't know if I'm finished playing the drums yet\".\nThe album was released in May 1997 as \"The Colour and the Shape\". It produced several singles, including \"Everlong\", \"My Hero\", and \"Monkey Wrench\", and cemented Foo Fighters as a staple of rock radio.\nThe following September, Smear left the band, citing a need to settle down after a lifetime of touring. Smear was replaced by Grohl's former Scream bandmate Franz Stahl. Stahl departed before the band recorded its third album and was replaced by touring guitarist Chris Shiflett, who later became a full-fledged member during the recording of \"One by One\".\n1999\u20132005.\nGrohl's life of non-stop touring and travel continued with Foo Fighters' popularity. During his infrequent pauses he lived in Seattle and Los Angeles before returning to Alexandria, Virginia. It was there that he turned his basement into a recording studio where the 1999 album \"There Is Nothing Left to Lose\" was recorded. It was recorded following the departure from Capitol and their former president Gary Gersh. Grohl described the recording experience as \"intoxicating at times\" because the band members were left completely to their own devices. He added, \"One of the advantages of finishing the record before we had a new label was that it was purely our creation. It was complete and not open to outside tampering.\"\nIn 2000, the band recruited Queen guitarist Brian May to add some guitar flourish to a cover of Pink Floyd's \"Have a Cigar\", a song which Foo Fighters previously recorded as a B-side. The friendship between the two bands resulted in Grohl and Taylor Hawkins being asked to induct Queen into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2001. Grohl and Hawkins joined May and Queen drummer Roger Taylor to perform \"Tie Your Mother Down\", with Grohl standing in on vocals for Freddie Mercury. May later contributed guitar work for the song \"Tired of You\" on the ensuing Foo Fighters album, as well as on an unreleased Foo Fighters song called \"Knucklehead\".\nNear the end of 2001, Foo Fighters returned to the studio to work on their fourth album. After four months in the studio, with the sessions finished, Grohl accepted an invitation to join Queens of the Stone Age and helped them to record their 2002 album \"Songs for the Deaf\". (Grohl can be seen drumming for the band in the video for the song \"No One Knows\".) After a brief tour through North America, Britain and Japan with the band and feeling rejuvenated by the effort, Grohl recalled the other band members to completely re-record their album at his studio in Virginia. The effort became their fourth album, \"One by One\".\nOn November 23, 2002, Grohl achieved a historical milestone by replacing himself on the top of the \"Billboard\" modern rock chart, when \"You Know You're Right\" by Nirvana was replaced by \"All My Life\" by Foo Fighters. When \"All My Life\" ended its run, after a one-week respite, \"No One Knows\" by Queens of the Stone Age took the number one spot. Between October 26, 2002, and March 1, 2003, Grohl was in the number one spot on the Modern rock charts for 17 of 18 successive weeks, as a member of three different groups.\n2005\u20132009.\nGrohl and Foo Fighters released their fifth album \"In Your Honor\" on June 14, 2005. Prior to starting work on the album, the band spent almost a year relocating Grohl's home-based Virginia studio to a brand new facility, dubbed Studio 606, located in a warehouse near Los Angeles. Featuring collaborations with John Paul Jones of Led Zeppelin, Josh Homme of Queens of the Stone Age and Norah Jones, the album was a departure from previous efforts, and included one rock and one acoustic disc.\nFoo Fighters' sixth studio album \"Echoes, Silence, Patience &amp; Grace\" was released on September 25, 2007. It was recorded during a three-month period between March 2007 and June 2007, and its release was preceded by the first single \"The Pretender\" on September 17. The second single, \"Long Road to Ruin\", was released on December 3, 2007, followed by the third single, \"Let It Die\", on June 24, 2008.\nOn November 3, 2009, Foo Fighters released their first \"Greatest Hits\" collection, consisting of 16 tracks including a previously unreleased acoustic version of \"Everlong\" and two new tracks \"Wheels\" and \"Word Forward\" which were produced by Nevermind's producer Butch Vig. Grohl said he felt the \"Greatest Hits\" was too early and \"can look like an obituary\". He did not feel they had written their best hits yet.\n2010\u20132014.\nFoo Fighters' seventh studio album, \"Wasting Light\", was released on April 12, 2011. It became the band's first album to reach No. 1 in the United States. Despite rumors of a hiatus, Grohl confirmed in January 2013 that the band had completed writing material for their follow-up to \"Wasting Light\".\nGrohl and members of Foo Fighters sometimes perform as a cover band \"Chevy Metal\", as they did in May 2015 at \"Conejo Valley Days\", a county fair in Thousand Oaks, California.\nOn November 10, 2014, Foo Fighters released their eighth studio album, \"Sonic Highways\", which reached number two in the United States. The album features eight songs, each inspired by a different U.S. city's musical history and culture researched by Grohl himself.\n2015\u2013present.\nOn June 12, 2015, while playing a show in Gothenburg, Sweden, Grohl fell off the stage, breaking his leg. He left temporarily and returned with a cast to finish the concert. Afterward, the band canceled the remainder of its European tour. To avoid having to cancel the band's upcoming North American tour, Grohl designed a large \"elevated throne\" which would allow him to perform on stage with a broken leg. The throne was unveiled at a concert in Washington, D.C., on July 4, where Grohl used the stage's video screens to show the crowd video of him falling from the stage in Gothenburg as well as X-rays of his broken leg. Beginning with the show on July 4, Foo Fighters began selling new tour merchandise rebranding the band's North American tour as the \"Broken Leg Tour\". In 2016, Grohl lent his throne to Axl Rose of Guns N' Roses after Rose broke his foot. He lent it again in 2021 to Darin Wall, of the Seattle metal band Greyhawk, after Wall was shot in the leg.\nOn July 31, 2015, Grohl posted a personal reply to Fabio Zaffagnini, Marco Sabiu, and the 1,000 participants of the \"Rockin' 1000\" project in Cesena, Italy, thanking them for their combined performance of the Foo Fighters' song \"Learn to Fly\", indicating (in broken Italian), \"...\u00a0I promise [Foo Fighters will] see you soon\". On November 3, Foo Fighters performed in Cesena, where Grohl invited some \"Rockin' 1000\" members onto the stage to perform with the band.\nOn September 15, 2017, Foo Fighters released their ninth studio album \"Concrete and Gold\", which became the band's second album to debut at number one on the \"Billboard\" 200. After the Concrete and Gold Tour, Grohl announced that the band would be taking a break. The tenth Foo Fighters studio album, \"Medicine at Midnight\", was released on February 5, 2021, following delays due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It debuted at number three on the \"Billboard\" 200. The \"Medicine at Midnight\" tour was canceled following the death of Hawkins on March 25, 2022. The eleventh Foo Fighters studio album \"But Here We Are\" was released on June 2, 2023. The album is dedicated to Hawkins and Grohl's mother, Virginia, both of whom died in 2022.\nOther work.\nMusical projects and contributions.\nGrohl frequently participates in music projects apart from his main bands. In 1992, he played drums on Buzz Osborne's Kiss-styled solo-EP \"King Buzzo;\" he was credited as \"Dale Nixon\", a pseudonym that Greg Ginn adopted to play bass on Black Flag's \"My War\". He also released the music cassette \"Pocketwatch\" under the pseudonym \"Late!\" on the now-defunct indie label Simple Machines.\nIn 1993, Grohl was recruited to help recreate the music of the Beatles' early years for the movie \"Backbeat\". In 1993\u201394, he played drums in the Backbeat Band, an alternative rock supergroup that also included Greg Dulli of the Afghan Whigs, indie producer Don Fleming, Mike Mills of R.E.M., Thurston Moore of Sonic Youth, and Dave Pirner of Soul Asylum.\nIn 1994, Grohl played drums on two tracks for Mike Watt's \"Ball-Hog or Tugboat?\". In early 1995, Grohl and Foo Fighters played their first US tour: the Ring Spiel Tour, opening for Watt and also playing, alongside Eddie Vedder, in Watt's supporting band.\nIn January 1997, Grohl played a few songs with David Bowie for Bowie's 50th birthday concert at Madison Square Garden.\nIn the early 2000s, Grohl spent time in his basement studio writing and recording several songs for Probot, a heavy metal music project, recruiting his favorite metal vocalists from the 1980s, including Lemmy of Mot\u00f6rhead, Conrad Lant from Venom, King Diamond, Scott Weinrich, Snake of Voivod and Max Cavalera of Sepultura. Probot released an album in 2004.\nIn 2003, Grohl stepped behind the kit to perform on Killing Joke's second self titled album, Killing Joke (2003 album). This surprised some fans of Nirvana, which had been accused of plagiarizing the opening riff of \"Come as You Are\" from Killing Joke's 1984 song \"Eighties\". However, the controversy failed to create a lasting rift between the bands. Foo Fighters covered Killing Joke's \"Requiem\" during the late 1990s, and were joined by Killing Joke singer Jaz Coleman for a performance of the song at a show in New Zealand in 2003. Also in 2003, at the 45th Annual Grammy Awards, Grohl performed in an ad hoc supergroup with Bruce Springsteen, Elvis Costello, and Steven Van Zandt in tribute to the recently deceased singer/guitarist Joe Strummer.\nGrohl lent his drumming skills to other artists during the early 2000s. In 2000, he played drums and sang on a track, \"Goodbye Lament\", for Tony Iommi's album \"Iommi\". In 2001, Grohl performed on Tenacious D's debut album, and appeared in the video for lead single \"Tribute\" as a demon. He later appeared in the duo's 2006 movie \"Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny\" as the devil in the song \"Beelzeboss\", and performed on its soundtrack. He also performed drums for their 2012 album \"Rize of the Fenix\". In 2002, Grohl helped Chan Marshall of Cat Power on the album \"You Are Free\" and played with Queens of the Stone Age on their album \"Songs for the Deaf\". Grohl also toured with the band in support of the album, delaying work on the Foo Fighters' album \"One by One\". In 2004, Grohl drummed on six tracks for Nine Inch Nails' 2005 album \"With Teeth\" and played percussion on one more, later returning to play drums on 'The Idea of You' from their 2016 EP \"Not the Actual Events\". He also drummed on the song \"Bad Boyfriend\" on Garbage's 2005 album \"Bleed Like Me\". Most recently, he recorded all the drums on Juliette and the Licks's 2006 album \"Four on the Floor\" and the song \"For Us\" from Pete Yorn's 2006 album \"Nightcrawler\". Beyond drumming, Grohl contributed guitar to a cover of Neil Young's \"I've Been Waiting For You\" on David Bowie's 2002 album \"Heathen\".\nIn June 2008, Grohl was Paul McCartney's special guest for a concert at the Anfield football stadium in Liverpool, in one of the central events of the English city's year as European Capital of Culture. Grohl joined McCartney's band singing backup vocals and playing guitar on \"Band on the Run\" and drums on \"Back in the U.S.S.R.\" and \"I Saw Her Standing There\". Grohl also performed with McCartney at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards, again playing drums on \"I Saw Her Standing There\". Grohl also helped pay tribute to McCartney at the 2010 Kennedy Center Honors along with No Doubt, Norah Jones, Steven Tyler, James Taylor, and Mavis Staples. He sang a duet version of \"Maybe I'm Amazed\" with Norah Jones on December 5, 2010.\nGrohl played drums on the tracks \"Run with the Wolves\" and \"Stand Up\" on the Prodigy's 2009 album \"Invaders Must Die\".\nIn July 2009, Grohl along with Josh Homme and John Paul Jones formed a supergroup, Them Crooked Vultures. The trio performed their first show together on August 9, 2009, at Metro in Chicago. The band played their first UK gig on August 26, 2009, with a surprise appearance at Brixton Academy in London, supporting the Arctic Monkeys. The band released their debut album Them Crooked Vultures on November 16, 2009, in the UK and November 17, 2009, in the US.\nOn October 23, 2010, Grohl performed with Tenacious D at BlizzCon. He appeared as the drummer for the entire concert, and a year later he returned with Foo Fighters and played another set there, this time as guitarist and vocalist.\nAlso in 2010, Grohl helped write and performed on drums for \"Watch This\" with guitarist Slash and Duff McKagan on Slash's self-titled album that also included many other famous artists.\nIn October 2011, Grohl temporarily joined Cage the Elephant as a replacement on tour after drummer Jared Champion's appendix burst.\nGrohl directed a documentary entitled Sound City (2013) which is about the Van Nuys studio of the same name where \"Nevermind\" was recorded that shut down its music operations in 2011.\nIn 2012, following the departure of Joey Castillo from Queens of the Stone Age, Grohl performed on some tracks as drummer on their 2013 album \"...Like Clockwork\".\nAt , Paul McCartney joined Grohl and the surviving members of Nirvana (Krist Novoselic and touring guitarist Pat Smear) to perform \"Cut Me Some Slack\", a song later recorded for the Sound City soundtrack. In what was regarded as a Nirvana reunion with McCartney as a stand-in for Kurt Cobain, this was the first time in eighteen years that the three had played alongside each other.\nOn March 14, 2013, Grohl delivered a keynote speech at the 2013 South by Southwest conference in Austin, Texas. He described his musical life from youth through to the Foo Fighters and emphasized the importance of each individual's voice: \"There is no right or wrong\u2014there is only your voice\u00a0...What matters most is that it's your voice. Cherish it. Respect it. Nurture it. Challenge it. Respect it.\" Grohl said during the speech that Psy's \"Gangnam Style\" was one of his favorite songs of the past decade. He also said Edgar Winter's instrumental \"Frankenstein\" was the song that made him want to become a musician.\nOn November 6, 2013, Grohl played drums at the 2013 Country Music Association Awards, replacing drummer Chris Fryar in the Zac Brown Band. The band debuted their new song \"Day for the Dead\". Grohl also produced Zac Brown Band's EP \"The Grohl Sessions, Vol. 1\".\nGrohl worked closely with indie hip-hop band RDGLDGRN on their EP. While Grohl was filming his \"Sound City\" documentary, the group asked the fellow native of Northern Virginia to drum on \"I Love Lamp\". Grohl wound up drumming for the entire record, with the exception of \"Million Fans\", which features a sampled breakbeat.\nGrohl, a fan of theatrical Swedish metal band Ghost, produced their EP \"If You Have Ghost\". He was also featured in a number of songs on the EP. Grohl played rhythm guitar for the song \"If You Have Ghosts\" (a cover of a Roky Erickson song), and drums on \"I'm a Marionette\" (an ABBA cover) as well as \"Waiting for the Night\" (a Depeche Mode cover). According to a member of Ghost, Grohl has appeared live in concert with the band wearing the same identity concealing outfit that the rest of the band usually wears.\nIn September, the all-star covers album by the Alice Cooper-led Hollywood Vampires supergroup was released and features Grohl playing drums on the medley \"One/Jump Into the Fire\".\nOn August 10, 2018, Grohl released \"Play\", a solo recording lasting over 22 minutes. A mini documentary accompanied it. That same year, Grohl invited ten-year-old Collier Cash Rule on stage at a Foo Fighters concert in Kansas City, Missouri and gave him his guitar. Rule played several Metallica songs and Grohl sang one verse and the chorus to \"Enter Sandman\".\nBetween August and November 2020, Grohl participated in an online drum battle with ten-year-old drummer Nandi Bushell, who had released cover versions of Nirvana and Foo Fighters songs on her YouTube channel, then challenged the elder drummer to a contest. After going back and forth with Bushell a few times, Grohl jokingly conceded victory to her, and wrote and performed a song in her honor. Grohl invited Bushell to perform with the Foo Fighters on stage during their August 26, 2021, show at the L.A. Forum, where she played drums on \"Everlong\", the show's finale. The videos of the drum battle received tens of millions of views.\nDuring Hanukkah of 2020, Grohl collaborated with Greg Kurstin to release previously recorded covers of songs by Jewish artists under the moniker The Hanukkah Sessions, one per night. This continued in 2021 and 2022.\nOn October 5, 2021, Grohl's memoir \"The Storyteller: Tales of Life and Music\" was published by Dey Street Books. Grohl developed a thrash metal record for a fictional band named Dream Widow (who self-destructed 25 years ago), as developed for a horror-comedy movie titled \"Studio 666\". Grohl worked to create the Dream Widow album and aimed to release it at the same time as the film, on February 25, 2022. On March 25, 2022, the self-titled \"Dream Widow\" EP was released to digital streaming services featuring eight tracks ranging from thrash, death and extreme metal. The EP also featured Rami Jaffee, Jim Rota and Oliver Roman.\nOn June 25, 2022, Grohl duetted with Paul McCartney when he headlined the Glastonbury Festival. It was his first performance since the death of Taylor Hawkins earlier in the year.\nTelevision.\nSince his first appearance in 1992, Grohl has been a musical guest on \"Saturday Night Live\" 15 timesmore than any other musician. He has appeared with Nirvana, Foo Fighters, Them Crooked Vultures, Mick Jagger, and Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers.\nGrohl has also appeared in several sketches on \"SNL\". On October 13, 2007, he performed in the \"SNL\" Digital Short \"People Getting Punched Just Before Eating\". On February 6, 2010, he appeared as a middle-aged punk rock drummer reuniting the group \"Crisis of Conformity\" (fronted by Fred Armisen) after 25 years in a skit later on in the episode. On April 9, 2011, he appeared in the \"SNL\" Digital Short \"Helen Mirren's Magical Bosom\" and the sketch \"Bongo's Clown Room\".\nIn August 2000, Grohl voiced Daniel Dotson, an egotistical art instructor, in \"Is It Fall Yet?\", the first of two film-length installments for\u00a0MTV's animated series \"Daria\". In mid-2010, Grohl added his name to the list of contributing rock star voice cameos for Cartoon Network's heavy metal parody/tribute show, \"Metalocalypse\". He voiced the controversial Syrian dictator, Abdule Malik in the season 3 finale, \"Doublebookedklok\".\nIn February 2013, Grohl filled in as host of \"Chelsea Lately\" for a week. Guests included Elton John, who disclosed on the E! show that he would appear with Grohl on the next Queens of the Stone Age album. Grohl had previously hosted the show during the first week of December 2012 as part of \"Celebrity Guest Host Week\".\nOn May 20, 2015, David Letterman selected Grohl and the Foo Fighters to play \"Everlong\" as the last musical guest on the final episode of \"Late Show with David Letterman\". Letterman stated that he considered \"Everlong\" to be his favorite song and that he and the band were \"joined at the hip\" ever since the band canceled tour dates to play his first show back from heart bypass surgery at his request. On December 1, 2015, Grohl appeared on an episode of \"The Muppets\" where he competed in a \"drum off\" with Animal.\nGrohl appeared in the 50th anniversary season of \"Sesame Street\" in February 2019. On January 28, it was announced that the first authorized Dave Grohl documentary will be released via The Coda Collection. The documentary was released April 30, as \"What Drives Us\". On October 8, Grohl was the guest storyteller on CBeebies \"Bedtime Story\", reading a story based on the Beatles song \"Octopus's Garden\".\nFilmmaking.\nGrohl directed the Foo Fighters music videos for \"Monkey Wrench\" (1997), \"My Hero\" (1998), \"All My Life\" (2002), \"White Limo\" (2011), and \"Rope\" (2011), as well as all the music videos from the \"Sonic Highways\" and \"Concrete and Gold\" era. Outside of Foo Fighters, he also filmed the music video for Soundgarden's \"By Crooked Steps\" (2014).\nIn 2013, Grohl produced and directed the documentary \"Sound City\", about the history of the famed Sound City Studios recording studios in Van Nuys. The film, Grohl's feature-length directorial debut, premiered at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival.\nAccompanying the release of \"Sonic Highways\", Grohl directed an eight-part documentary miniseries of the same name that chronicles the album's development and recording across eight different American cities. It premiered on HBO on October 17, 2014.\nIn 2021, Grohl directed \"What Drives Us\", a feature-length documentary on van touring. It was released on April 30, 2021, on the Coda Collection via Amazon Prime.\nCal Jam.\nInspired by California Jam, to celebrate the release of Foo Fighters' ninth studio album \"Concrete and Gold\" and begin their North American tour, Cal Jam 17, a music festival curated by Grohl and Foo Fighters, was held from October 67, 2017 at Glen Helen Amphitheater, with 27,800 attendees, 3,100 campers, and nine arrests. Cal Jam 18, held October 5\u20136, 2018 in San Bernardino, California, featured the Foo Fighters and a Nirvana reunion.\nMusicianship and equipment.\nGrohl is a self-taught musician and cannot read musical notation, and instead plays only by ear. His drum kit, designed by Drum Workshop, features five different sized tom-tom drums ranging from 5x8 inches to 16x18 inches, a 19-inch crash cymbal, two 20-inch crash cymbals, an 18-inch China cymbal, a 24-inch ride cymbal, and a standard kick drum, snare drum, and hi-hat.\nGrohl's primary recording guitar is an original cherry red Gibson Trini Lopez Standard that he bought in the early 1990s, while still with Nirvana, because he liked the different style of headstock and the diamond-shaped sound holes on what was otherwise an ES-335. Onstage during early Foo Fighters tours, Grohl played two Gibson Les Pauls, then relied primarily on a pair of black Gibson Explorers while touring for \"The Colour and the Shape\", \"There is Nothing Left to Lose\", and \"One by One\".\nSince 2017, Grohl's primary stage guitar has been his signature model Pelham Blue Gibson DG-335, which was designed by Gibson based on the Trini Lopez Standard specs, but in different colors, with a stop tailpiece instead of the Trini Lopez's trapeze tailpiece and PAF-style \"Burstbucker\" pickups. For the Foo Fighters' return in 2023, Grohl also began playing a DG-335 in a white finish, matching the aesthetics of But Here We Are. His primary acoustic guitar is a black Elvis Presley model Gibson Dove.\nAdvocacy, philanthropy and views.\nIn May 2006, Grohl sent a note of support to the two trapped miners in the Beaconsfield mine collapse in Tasmania, Australia, who had survived the initial rockfall. In the initial days following the collapse, one of the men requested an iPod with the Foo Fighters album \"In Your Honor\". In October 2006, one of the miners took up his offer, joining Grohl for a drink after a Foo Fighters acoustic concert at the Sydney Opera House. Following the event, Grohl wrote \"Ballad of the Beaconsfield Miners\", an instrumental piece, which was included on Foo Fighters' 2007 release \"Echoes, Silence, Patience &amp; Grace\", and features Kaki King.\nHe has worn a White Knot ribbon, a symbol of support for same-sex marriage, to various events; when questioned about the knot, he responded, \"I believe in love and I believe in equality and I believe in marriage equality.\" Grohl's gay rights activism dates back to the early 1990s, when Nirvana performed at a benefit to raise money to fight Oregon Ballot Measure 9, which forbade governments in Oregon from promoting or facilitating homosexuality. Grohl participated in two counter-protests against the Westboro Baptist Church for their anti-gay stance: in 2011, by performing \"Keep It Clean\" on the back of a flatbed truck and in 2015, by Rickrolling them.\nDespite growing up with a firearm, Grohl is an advocate for gun control. In a 2008 interview, Grohl said he had never used cocaine, heroin, or speed, and that he had stopped smoking cannabis and taking LSD at the age of 20. He contributed to a 2009 anti-drug video for the BBC. He has described himself as a coffee addict who drinks an average of six cups of coffee every morning; in 2009, he was admitted to a hospital with chest pains caused by a caffeine overdose.\nGrohl supported Barack Obama's 2012 presidential campaign and performed \"My Hero\" at the 2012 Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, North Carolina. Foo Fighters supported Joe Biden's 2020 presidential campaign and played at the \"Celebrating America\" concert during Biden's inauguration in 2021. In 2018, he said that Donald Trump \"seems like a massive jerk\". After Trump used the band's song \"My Hero\" at a rally without their permission, a Foo Fighters spokesperson announced that the band would donate any royalties from the usage to the Kamala Harris 2024 presidential campaign.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1994, Grohl married Jennifer Leigh Youngblood, a photographer from Grosse Pointe, Michigan. They separated in December 1996 and divorced in 1997; Grohl admitted to infidelity. After divorcing Youngblood, Grohl dated snowboarder Tina Basich for a couple of years. Basich ended the relationship after discovering his infidelity. From 1999 to 2001, Grohl dated former Hole bassist Melissa Auf der Maur. In 2003, he married Jordyn Blum; they had met at the Sunset Marquis Whiskey Bar in West Hollywood, California. They reside in Los Angeles and have three daughters, born in 2006, 2009, and 2014. In 2024, Grohl announced on Instagram that he had fathered a fourth daughter, this time outside his marriage, and asked his family for forgiveness.\nIn a June 2011 interview, Grohl revealed that he was going deaf in his left ear due to decades of performing on stage. During his appearance on \"The Howard Stern Show\" in February 2022, he stated that he suffers from hearing loss and that this has an impact on both his daily life and life as a musician; his tinnitus has forced him to read lips for about 20 years, a situation that became more difficult when people began wearing face masks during the COVID-19 pandemic. As for producing music, he refuses to use in-ear monitors despite their ability to protect his ears because it \"removes [him] from the natural atmosphere sound so [he] cannot hear [his] bandmates\". He said that his ears are \"still tuned in to certain frequencies, meaning [he's] still able to pick up on minute sonic details\u2014even down to the slightest differences between cymbal crashes\".\nIn 2012, \"Stereogum\" estimated Grohl as the third-wealthiest drummer, behind Ringo Starr and Phil Collins, with a fortune of $260 million. From 1993 to 1997, Grohl owned a house in Shoreline, Washington. In 2015, Grohl sold his beachfront house in Oxnard, California, for $2.9 million.\nHonors.\nIn August 2009, Grohl was given the key to the city of Warren, Ohio, his birthplace, and performed the songs \"Everlong\", \"Times Like These\", and \"My Hero\". A roadway in downtown Warren named \"David Grohl Alley\" has been dedicated to him with murals by local artists.\nIn 2012, Grohl's hometown of Warren unveiled oversized drumsticks, listed in the Guinness Book of World Records for the largest drumsticks in the world. They were also displayed on July 7, 2012, at a concert at the Warren Amphitheater. Grohl's first solo \"Rolling Stone\" cover story was published on December 4, 2014. In 2016, Grohl was ranked 27th on the list of the best drummers of all time by \"Rolling Stone\". Grohl received the George and Ira Gershwin Award in 2024."}
{"id": "8100", "revid": "45806405", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8100", "title": "Dollar", "text": "Dollar is the name of more than 25 currencies. The United States dollar, named after the international currency known as the Spanish dollar, was established in 1792 and is the first so named that still survives. Others include the Australian dollar, Brunei dollar, Canadian dollar, Eastern Caribbean dollar, Hong Kong dollar, Jamaican dollar, Liberian dollar, Namibian dollar, New Taiwan dollar, New Zealand dollar, Singapore dollar, Trinidad and Tobago Dollar and several others. The symbol for most of those currencies is the dollar sign $; the same symbol is used by many countries using peso currencies. The name \"dollar\" originates from the \"thaler\" (from \"thal\", German for valley) suffix in the name of a 29 g silver coin called the Joachimsthaler minted in Bohemia.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nOn 15 January 1520, the Kingdom of Bohemia began minting coins from silver mined locally in Joachimsthal and marked on reverse with the Bohemian lion. The coins were named \"Joachimsthaler\" after the town, becoming shortened in common usage to \"thaler\" or \"taler\". The town's name is derived from Saint Joachim, coupled with the German word \"Thal\" (\"Tal\" in modern spelling), which means 'valley' (cf. the English term \"dale\"); the coin is thus \"from the valley of [St] Joachim\".\nThis name found its way into other languages, for example:\nIn contrast to other languages which adopted the second part of word \"joachimsthaler\", the first part found its way into Russian language and became , (\u0435\u0444\u0438\u043c\u043e\u043a).\nThe predecessor of the Joachimsthaler was the \"Guldengroschen\" or Guldiner which was a large silver coin originally minted in Tirol in 1486 and introduced into the Duchy of Saxony in 1500. The King of Bohemia wanted a similar silver coin, which became the Joachimsthaler.\nEurope and colonial North America.\nThe Joachimsthaler of the 16th century was succeeded by the longer-lived Reichsthaler of the Holy Roman Empire, used from the 16th to 19th centuries. The Netherlands also introduced its own dollars in the 16th century: the Burgundian Cross Thaler (\"Bourgondrische Kruisdaalder\"), the German-inspired \"Rijksdaalder\", and the Dutch lion dollar (\"leeuwendaalder\"). The latter coin was used for Dutch trade in the Middle East, in the Dutch East Indies and West Indies, and in the Thirteen Colonies of North America.\nFor the English North American colonists, however, the Spanish peso or \"piece of eight\" had always held first place, and this coin was also called the \"dollar\" as early as 1581. Spanish dollars or \"pieces of eight\" were distributed widely in the Spanish colonies in the New World and in the Philippines.\nOrigins of the dollar sign.\nThe sign is first attested in business correspondence in the 1770s as a scribal abbreviation \"ps\", referring to the Spanish American peso, that is, the \"Spanish dollar\" as it was known in British North America. These late 18th- and early 19th-century manuscripts show that the \"s\" gradually came to be written over the \"p\" developing a close equivalent to the \"$\" mark, and this new symbol was retained to refer to the American dollar as well, once this currency was adopted in 1785 by the United States.\nAdoption by the United States.\nBy the time of the American Revolution, the Spanish d\u00f3lar gained significance because they backed paper money authorized by the individual colonies and the Continental Congress. Because Britain deliberately withheld hard currency from the American colonies, virtually all the non-token coinage in circulation was Spanish (and to a much lesser extent French and Dutch) silver, obtained via illegal but widespread commerce with the West Indies. Common in the Thirteen Colonies, Spanish d\u00f3lar were even legal tender in one colony, Virginia.\nOn 2 April 1792, U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton reported to Congress the precise amount of silver found in Spanish dollar coins in common use in the states. As a result, the United States dollar was defined as a unit of pure silver weighing 371 4/16th grains (24.057\u00a0grams), or 416 grains of standard silver (standard silver being defined as 371.25/416 in silver, and balance in alloy). It was specified that the \"money of account\" of the United States should be expressed in those same \"dollars\" or parts thereof. Additionally, all lesser-denomination coins were defined as percentages of the dollar coin, such that a half-dollar was to contain half as much silver as a dollar, quarter-dollars would contain one-fourth as much, and so on.\nIn an act passed in January 1837, the dollar's weight was reduced to 412.5 grains and alloy at 90% silver, resulting in the same fine silver content of 371.25 grains. On 21 February 1853, the quantity of silver in the lesser coins was reduced, with the effect that their denominations no longer represented their silver content relative to dollar coins.\nVarious acts have subsequently been passed affecting the amount and type of metal in U.S. coins, so that today there is no legal definition of the term \"dollar\" to be found in U.S. statute. Currently the closest thing to a definition is found in United States Code Title 31, Section 5116, paragraph b, subsection 2: \"The Secretary [of the Treasury] shall sell silver under conditions the Secretary considers appropriate for at least $1.292929292 a fine troy ounce.\"\nSilver was mostly removed from U.S. coinage by 1965 and the dollar became a free-floating fiat money without a commodity backing defined in terms of real gold or silver. The US Mint continues to make silver $1-denomination coins, but these are not intended for general circulation.\nRelationship to the troy pound.\nThe quantity of silver chosen in 1792 to correspond to one dollar, namely, 371.25 grains of pure silver, is very close to the geometric mean of one troy pound and one pennyweight. In what follows, \"dollar\" will be used as a unit of mass. A troy pound being 5760 grains and a pennyweight being 240 times smaller, or 24 grains, the geometric mean is, to the nearest hundredth, 371.81 grains. This means that the ratio of a pound to a dollar (15.52) roughly equals the ratio of a dollar to a pennyweight (15.47). These ratios are also very close to the ratio of a gram to a grain: 15.43. Finally, in the United States, the ratio of the value of gold to the value of silver in the period from 1792 to 1873 averaged to about 15.5, being 15 from 1792 to 1834 and around 16 from 1834 to 1873. This is also nearly the value of the gold to silver ratio determined by Isaac Newton in 1717.\nThat these three ratios are all approximately equal has some interesting consequences. Let the gold to silver ratio be exactly 15.5. Then a pennyweight of gold, that is 24 grains of gold, is nearly equal in value to a dollar of silver (1 dwt of gold = $1.002 of silver). Second, a dollar of gold is nearly equal in value to a pound of silver ($1 of gold = 5754 3/8 grains of silver = 0.999 Lb of silver). Third, the number of grains in a dollar (371.25) roughly equals the number of grams in a troy pound (373.24).\nUsage in the United Kingdom.\nThere are two quotes in the plays of William Shakespeare referring to dollars as money. Coins known as \"thistle dollars\" were in use in Scotland during the 16th and 17th centuries, and use of the English word, and perhaps even the use of the coin, may have begun at the University of St Andrews. This might be supported by a reference to the sum of \"ten thousand dollars\" in \"Macbeth\" (act I, scene II) (an anachronism because the real Macbeth, upon whom the play was based, lived in the 11th century). In the Sherlock Holmes story \"The Man with the Twisted Lip\" by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, published in 1891, an Englishman posing as a London beggar describes the shillings and pounds he collected as dollars.\nIn 1804, a British five-shilling piece, or crown, was sometimes called \"dollar\". It was an overstruck Spanish eight real coin (the famous \"piece of eight\"), the original of which was known as a Spanish dollar. Large numbers of these eight-real coins were captured during the Napoleonic Wars, hence their re-use by the Bank of England. They remained in use until 1811. During World War II, when the U.S. dollar was (approximately) valued at five shillings, the half crown (2s 6d) acquired the nickname \"half dollar\" or \"half a dollar\" in the UK.\nUsage elsewhere.\nChinese demand for silver in the 19th and early 20th centuries led several countries, notably the United Kingdom, United States and Japan, to mint trade dollars, which were often of slightly different weights from comparable domestic coinage. Silver dollars reaching China (whether Spanish, trade, or other) were often stamped with Chinese characters known as \"chop marks\", which indicated that that particular coin had been assayed by a well-known merchant and deemed genuine.\nOther national currencies called \"dollar\".\nPrior to 1873, the silver dollar circulated in many parts of the world, with a value in relation to the British gold sovereign of roughly $1 = 4s 2d (21p approx). As a result of the decision of the German Empire to stop minting silver \"thaler\" coins in 1871, in the wake of the Franco-Prussian War, the worldwide price of silver began to fall. This resulted in the U.S. Coinage Act (1873) which put the United States onto a 'de facto' gold standard. Canada and Newfoundland were already on the gold standard, and the result was that the value of the dollar in North America increased in relation to silver dollars being used elsewhere, particularly Latin America and the Far East. By 1900, value of silver dollars had fallen to 50 percent of gold dollars. Following the abandonment of the gold standard by Canada in 1931, the Canadian dollar began to drift away from parity with the U.S. dollar. It returned to parity a few times, but since the end of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates that was agreed to in 1944, the Canadian dollar has been floating against the U.S. dollar. The silver dollars of Latin America and South East Asia began to diverge from each other as well during the course of the 20th century. The Straits dollar adopted a gold exchange standard in 1906 after it had been forced to rise in value against other silver dollars in the region. Hence, by 1935, when China and Hong Kong came off the silver standard, the Straits dollar was worth 2s 4d (11.5p approx) sterling, whereas the Hong Kong dollar was worth only 1s 3d sterling (6p approx).\nThe term \"dollar\" has also been adopted by other countries for currencies which do not share a common history with other dollars. Many of these currencies adopted the name after moving from a \u00a3sd-based to a decimalized monetary system. Examples include the Australian dollar, the New Zealand dollar, the Jamaican dollar, the Cayman Islands dollar, the Fiji dollar, the Namibian dollar, the Rhodesian dollar, the Zimbabwe dollar, and the Solomon Islands dollar."}
{"id": "8101", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8101", "title": "Dutch", "text": "Dutch or Nederlands commonly refers to:\nDutch may also refer to:"}
{"id": "8102", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8102", "title": "Dysprosium", "text": "Dysprosium is a chemical element; it has symbol Dy and atomic number 66. It is a rare-earth element in the lanthanide series with a metallic silver luster. Dysprosium is never found in nature as a free element, though, like other lanthanides, it is found in various minerals, such as xenotime. Naturally occurring dysprosium is composed of seven isotopes, the most abundant of which is 164Dy.\nDysprosium was first identified in 1886 by Paul \u00c9mile Lecoq de Boisbaudran, but it was not isolated in pure form until the development of ion-exchange techniques in the 1950s. Dysprosium has relatively few applications where it cannot be replaced by other chemical elements. It is used for its high thermal neutron absorption cross-section in making control rods in nuclear reactors, for its high magnetic susceptibility () in data-storage applications, and as a component of Terfenol-D (a magnetostrictive material). Soluble dysprosium salts are mildly toxic, while the insoluble salts are considered non-toxic.\nCharacteristics.\nPhysical properties.\nDysprosium is a rare-earth element and has a metallic, bright silver luster. It is quite soft and can be machined without sparking if overheating is avoided. Dysprosium's physical characteristics can be greatly affected by even small amounts of impurities.\nDysprosium and holmium have the highest magnetic strengths of the elements, especially at low temperatures. Dysprosium has a simple ferromagnetic ordering at temperatures below its Curie temperature of , at which point it undergoes a first-order phase transition from the orthorhombic crystal structure to hexagonal close-packed (hcp). It then has a helical antiferromagnetic state, in which all of the atomic magnetic moments in a particular basal plane layer are parallel and oriented at a fixed angle to the moments of adjacent layers. This unusual antiferromagnetism transforms into a disordered (paramagnetic) state at . It transforms from the hcp phase to the body-centered cubic phase at .\nChemical properties.\nDysprosium metal retains its luster in dry air but it will tarnish slowly in moist air, and it burns readily to form dysprosium(III) oxide:\nDysprosium is quite electropositive and reacts slowly with cold water (and quickly with hot water) to form dysprosium hydroxide:\nDysprosium hydroxide decomposes to form DyO(OH) at elevated temperatures, which then decomposes again to dysprosium(III) oxide.\nDysprosium metal vigorously reacts with all the halogens at above 200\u00a0\u00b0C:\nDysprosium dissolves readily in dilute sulfuric acid to form solutions containing the yellow Dy(III) ions, which exist as a [Dy(OH2)9]3+ complex:\nThe resulting compound, dysprosium(III) sulfate, is noticeably paramagnetic.\nCompounds.\nDysprosium halides, such as DyF3 and DyBr3, tend to take on a yellow color. Dysprosium oxide, also known as dysprosia, is a white powder that is highly magnetic, more so than iron oxide.\nDysprosium combines with various non-metals at high temperatures to form binary compounds with varying composition and oxidation states +3 and sometimes +2, such as DyN, DyP, DyH2 and DyH3; DyS, DyS2, Dy2S3 and Dy5S7; DyB2, DyB4, DyB6 and DyB12, as well as Dy3C and Dy2C3.\nDysprosium carbonate, Dy2(CO3)3, and dysprosium sulfate, Dy2(SO4)3, result from similar reactions. Most dysprosium compounds are soluble in water, though dysprosium carbonate tetrahydrate (Dy2(CO3)3\u00b74H2O) and dysprosium oxalate decahydrate (Dy2(C2O4)3\u00b710H2O) are both insoluble in water. Two of the most abundant dysprosium carbonates, Dy2(CO3)3\u00b72\u20133H2O (similar to the mineral tengerite-(Y)), and DyCO3(OH) (similar to minerals kozoite-(La) and kozoite-(Nd)), are known to form via a poorly ordered (amorphous) precursor phase with a formula of Dy2(CO3)3\u00b74H2O. This amorphous precursor consists of highly hydrated spherical nanoparticles of 10\u201320\u00a0nm diameter that are exceptionally stable under dry treatment at ambient and high temperatures.\nDysprosium forms several intermetallics, including the dysprosium stannides.\nIsotopes.\nNaturally occurring dysprosium is composed of seven isotopes: 156Dy, 158Dy, 160Dy, 161Dy, 162Dy, 163Dy, and 164Dy. These are all considered stable, although only the last two are theoretically stable: the others can theoretically undergo alpha decay. Of the naturally occurring isotopes, 164Dy is the most abundant at 28%, followed by 162Dy at 26%. The least abundant is 156Dy at 0.06%. Dysprosium is the heaviest element to have isotopes that are predicted to be stable rather than observationally stable isotopes that are predicted to be radioactive.\nTwenty-nine radioisotopes have been synthesized, ranging in atomic mass from 138 to 173. The most stable of these is 154Dy, with a half-life of approximately 3\u00a0years, followed by 159Dy with a half-life of 144.4\u00a0days. The least stable is 138Dy, with a half-life of 200\u00a0ms. As a general rule, isotopes that are lighter than the stable isotopes tend to decay primarily by \u03b2+ decay, while those that are heavier tend to decay by \u03b2\u2212 decay. However, 154Dy decays primarily by alpha decay, and 152Dy and 159Dy decay primarily by electron capture. Dysprosium also has at least 11 metastable isomers, ranging in atomic mass from 140 to 165. The most stable of these is 165mDy, which has a half-life of 1.257\u00a0minutes. 149Dy has two metastable isomers, the second of which, 149m2Dy, has a half-life of 28\u00a0ns.\nHistory.\nIn 1878, erbium ores were found to contain the oxides of holmium and thulium. French chemist Paul \u00c9mile Lecoq de Boisbaudran, while working with holmium oxide, separated dysprosium oxide from it in Paris in 1886. His procedure for isolating the dysprosium involved dissolving dysprosium oxide in acid, then adding ammonia to precipitate the hydroxide. He was only able to isolate dysprosium from its oxide after more than 30 attempts at his procedure. On succeeding, he named the element \"dysprosium\" from the Greek \"dysprositos\" (\u03b4\u03c5\u03c3\u03c0\u03c1\u03cc\u03c3\u03b9\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2), meaning \"hard to get\". The element was not isolated in relatively pure form until after the development of ion exchange techniques by Frank Spedding at Iowa State University in the early 1950s.\nDue to its role in permanent magnets used for wind turbines, it has been argued that dysprosium will be one of the main objects of geopolitical competition in a world running on renewable energy. But this perspective has been criticised for failing to recognise that most wind turbines do not use permanent magnets and for underestimating the power of economic incentives for expanded production.\nIn 2021, Dy was turned into a 2-dimensional supersolid quantum gas.\nOccurrence.\nWhile dysprosium is never encountered as a free element, it is found in many minerals, including xenotime, fergusonite, gadolinite, euxenite, polycrase, blomstrandine, monazite and bastn\u00e4site, often with erbium and holmium or other rare earth elements. No dysprosium-dominant mineral (that is, with dysprosium prevailing over other rare earths in the composition) has yet been found.\nIn the high-yttrium version of these, dysprosium happens to be the most abundant of the heavy lanthanides, comprising up to 7\u20138% of the concentrate (as compared to about 65% for yttrium). The concentration of Dy in the Earth's crust is about 5.2\u00a0mg/kg and in sea water 0.9\u00a0ng/L.\nProduction.\nDysprosium is obtained primarily from monazite sand, a mixture of various phosphates. The metal is obtained as a by-product in the commercial extraction of yttrium. In isolating dysprosium, most of the unwanted metals can be removed magnetically or by a flotation process. Dysprosium can then be separated from other rare earth metals by an ion exchange displacement process. The resulting dysprosium ions can then react with either fluorine or chlorine to form dysprosium fluoride, DyF3, or dysprosium chloride, DyCl3. These compounds can be reduced using either calcium or lithium metals in the following reactions:\nThe components are placed in a tantalum crucible and fired in a helium atmosphere. As the reaction progresses, the resulting halide compounds and molten dysprosium separate due to differences in density. When the mixture cools, the dysprosium can be cut away from the impurities.\nAbout 100 tonnes of dysprosium are produced worldwide each year, with 99% of that total produced in China. Dysprosium prices have climbed nearly twentyfold, from $7 per pound in 2003, to $130 a pound in late 2010. The price increased to $1,400/kg in 2011 but fell to $240 in 2015, largely due to illegal production in China which circumvented government restrictions.\nCurrently, most dysprosium is being obtained from the ion-adsorption clay ores of southern China. the Browns Range Project pilot plant, 160\u00a0km south east of Halls Creek, Western Australia, is producing per annum.\nAccording to the United States Department of Energy, the wide range of its current and projected uses, together with the lack of any immediately suitable replacement, makes dysprosium the single most critical element for emerging clean energy technologies; even their most conservative projections predicted a shortfall of dysprosium before 2015. As of late 2015, there is a nascent rare earth (including dysprosium) extraction industry in Australia.\nApplications.\nDysprosium is used, in conjunction with vanadium and other elements, in making laser materials and commercial lighting. Because of dysprosium's high thermal-neutron absorption cross-section, dysprosium-oxide\u2013nickel cermets are used in neutron-absorbing control rods in nuclear reactors. Dysprosium\u2013cadmium chalcogenides are sources of infrared radiation, which is useful for studying chemical reactions. Because dysprosium and its compounds are highly susceptible to magnetization, they are employed in various data-storage applications, such as in hard disks. Dysprosium is increasingly in demand for the permanent magnets used in electric-car motors and wind-turbine generators.\nNeodymium\u2013iron\u2013boron magnets can have up to 6% of the neodymium substituted by dysprosium to raise the coercivity for demanding applications, such as drive motors for electric vehicles and generators for wind turbines. This substitution would require up to 100\u00a0grams of dysprosium per electric car produced. Based on Toyota's projected 2\u00a0million units per year, the use of dysprosium in applications such as this would quickly exhaust its available supply. The dysprosium substitution may also be useful in other applications because it improves the corrosion resistance of the magnets.\nDysprosium is one of the components of Terfenol-D, along with iron and terbium. Terfenol-D has the highest room-temperature magnetostriction of any known material, which is employed in transducers, wide-band mechanical resonators, and high-precision liquid-fuel injectors.\nDysprosium is used in dosimeters for measuring ionizing radiation. Crystals of calcium sulfate or calcium fluoride are doped with dysprosium. When these crystals are exposed to radiation, the dysprosium atoms become excited and luminescent. The luminescence can be measured to determine the degree of exposure to which the dosimeter has been subjected.\nNanofibers of dysprosium compounds have high strength and a large surface area. Therefore, they can be used to reinforce other materials and act as a catalyst. Fibers of dysprosium oxide fluoride can be produced by heating an aqueous solution of DyBr3 and NaF to 450\u00a0\u00b0C at 450\u00a0bars for 17\u00a0hours. This material is remarkably robust, surviving over 100\u00a0hours in various aqueous solutions at temperatures exceeding 400\u00a0\u00b0C without redissolving or aggregating. Additionally, dysprosium has been used to create a two dimensional supersolid in a laboratory environment. Supersolids are expected to exhibit unusual properties, including superfluidity.\nDysprosium iodide and dysprosium bromide are used in high-intensity metal-halide lamps. These compounds dissociate near the hot center of the lamp, releasing isolated dysprosium atoms. The latter re-emit light in the green and red part of the spectrum, thereby effectively producing bright light.\nSeveral paramagnetic crystal salts of dysprosium (dysprosium gallium garnet, DGG; dysprosium aluminium garnet, DAG; dysprosium iron garnet, DyIG) are used in adiabatic demagnetization refrigerators.\nThe trivalent dysprosium ion (Dy3+) has been studied due to its downshifting luminescence properties. Dy-doped yttrium aluminium garnet () excited in the ultraviolet region of the electromagnetic spectrum results in the emission of photons of longer wavelength in the visible region. This idea is the basis for a new generation of UV-pumped white light-emitting diodes.\nThe stable isotopes of dysprosium have been laser cooled and confined in magneto-optical traps for quantum physics experiments. The first Bose and Fermi quantum degenerate gases of an open shell lanthanide were created with dysprosium. Because dysprosium is highly magnetic\u2014indeed it is the most magnetic fermionic element and nearly tied with terbium for most magnetic bosonic atom\u2014such gases serve as the basis for quantum simulation with strongly dipolar atoms.\nDue to its strong magnetic properties, Dysprosium alloys are used in the marine industry's sound navigation and ranging (SONAR) system. The inclusion of dysprosium alloys in the design of SONAR transducers and receivers can improve sensitivity and accuracy by providing more stable and efficient magnetic fields.\nPrecautions.\nLike many powders, dysprosium powder may present an explosion hazard when mixed with air and when an ignition source is present. Thin foils of the substance can also be ignited by sparks or by static electricity. Dysprosium fires cannot be extinguished with water. It can react with water to produce flammable hydrogen gas. Dysprosium chloride fires can be extinguished with water. Dysprosium fluoride and dysprosium oxide are non-flammable. Dysprosium nitrate, Dy(NO3)3, is a strong oxidizing agent and readily ignites on contact with organic substances.\nSoluble dysprosium salts, such as dysprosium chloride and dysprosium nitrate are mildly toxic when ingested. Based on the toxicity of dysprosium chloride to mice, it is estimated that the ingestion of 500\u00a0grams or more could be fatal to a human (c.f. lethal dose of 300 grams of common table salt for a 100 kilogram human). The insoluble salts are non-toxic."}
{"id": "8103", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8103", "title": "Deforestation", "text": "Deforestation or forest clearance is the removal and destruction of a forest or stand of trees from land that is then converted to non-forest use. Deforestation can involve conversion of forest land to farms, ranches, or urban use. About 31% of Earth's land surface is covered by forests at present. This is one-third less than the forest cover before the expansion of agriculture, with half of that loss occurring in the last century. Between 15 million to 18 million hectares of forest, an area the size of Bangladesh, are destroyed every year. On average 2,400 trees are cut down each minute. Estimates vary widely as to the extent of deforestation in the tropics. In 2019, nearly a third of the overall tree cover loss, or 3.8 million hectares, occurred within humid tropical primary forests. These are areas of mature rainforest that are especially important for biodiversity and carbon storage.\nThe direct cause of most deforestation is agriculture by far. More than 80% of deforestation was attributed to agriculture in 2018. Forests are being converted to plantations for coffee, palm oil, rubber and various other popular products. Livestock grazing also drives deforestation. Further drivers are the wood industry (logging), urbanization and mining. The effects of climate change are another cause via the increased risk of wildfires (see deforestation and climate change).\nDeforestation results in habitat destruction which in turn leads to biodiversity loss. Deforestation also leads to extinction of animals and plants, changes to the local climate, and displacement of indigenous people who live in forests. Deforested regions often also suffer from other environmental problems such as desertification and soil erosion.\nAnother problem is that deforestation reduces the uptake of carbon dioxide (carbon sequestration) from the atmosphere. This reduces the potential of forests to assist with climate change mitigation. The role of forests in capturing and storing carbon and mitigating climate change is also important for the agricultural sector. The reason for this linkage is because the effects of climate change on agriculture pose new risks to global food systems.\nSince 1990, it is estimated that some 420 million hectares of forest have been lost through conversion to other land uses, although the rate of deforestation has decreased over the past three decades. Between 2015 and 2020, the rate of deforestation was estimated at 10 million hectares per year, down from 16 million hectares per year in the 1990s. The area of primary forest worldwide has decreased by over 80 million hectares since 1990. More than 100 million hectares of forests are adversely affected by forest fires, pests, diseases, invasive species, drought and adverse weather events.\nDefinition.\nDeforestation is defined as the conversion of forest to other land uses (regardless of whether it is human-induced).\n\"Deforestation\" and \"forest area net change\" are not the same: the latter is the sum of all forest losses (deforestation) and all forest gains (forest expansion) in a given period. Net change, therefore, can be positive or negative, depending on whether gains exceed losses, or vice versa.\nCurrent status by continent, region, country.\nThe FAO estimates that the global forest carbon stock has decreased 0.9%, and tree cover 4.2% between 1990 and 2020.\nAs of 2019 there is still disagreement about whether the global forest is shrinking or not: \"While above-ground biomass carbon stocks are estimated to be declining in the tropics, they are increasing globally due to increasing stocks in temperate and boreal forest.\nDeforestation in many countries\u2014both naturally occurring and human-induced\u2014is an ongoing issue. Between 2000 and 2012, of forests around the world were cut down. Deforestation and forest degradation continue to take place at alarming rates, which contributes significantly to the ongoing loss of biodiversity.\nDeforestation is more extreme in tropical and subtropical forests in emerging economies. More than half of all plant and land animal species in the world live in tropical forests. As a result of deforestation, only remain of the original of tropical rainforest that formerly covered the Earth. More than 3.6 million hectares of virgin tropical forest was lost in 2018.\nThe global annual net loss of trees is estimated to be approximately 10 billion. According to the Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020 the global average annual deforested land in the 2015\u20132020 demi-decade was 10 million hectares and the average annual forest area net loss in the 2000\u20132010 decade was 4.7 million hectares. The world has lost 178 million ha of forest since 1990, which is an area about the size of Libya.\nAn analysis of global deforestation patterns in 2021 showed that patterns of trade, production, and consumption drive deforestation rates in complex ways. While the location of deforestation can be mapped, it does not always match where the commodity is consumed. For example, consumption patterns in G7 countries are estimated to cause an average loss of 3.9 trees per person per year. In other words, deforestation can be directly related to imports\u2014for example, coffee.\nIn 2023, the Global Forest Watch reported a 9% decline in tropical primary forest loss compared to the previous year, with significant regional reductions in Brazil and Colombia overshadowed by increases elsewhere, leading to a 3.2% rise in global deforestation. Massive wildfires in Canada, exacerbated by climate change, contributed to a 24% increase in global tree cover loss, highlighting the ongoing threats to forests essential for carbon storage and biodiversity. Despite some progress, the overall trends in forest destruction and climate impacts remain off track.\nThe IPCC Sixth Assessment Report stated in 2022: \u201cOver 420 million ha of forest were lost to deforestation from 1990 to 2020; more than 90% of that loss took place in tropical areas (high confidence), threatening biodiversity, environmental services, livelihoods of forest communities and resilience to climate shocks (high confidence).\u201d\nSee also:\nRates of deforestation.\nGlobal deforestation sharply accelerated around 1852. As of 1947, the planet had of mature tropical forests, but by 2015, it was estimated that about half of these had been destroyed. Total land coverage by tropical rainforests decreased from 14% to 6%. Much of this loss happened between 1960 and 1990, when 20% of all tropical rainforests were destroyed. At this rate, extinction of such forests is projected to occur by the mid-21st century.\nIn the early 2000s, some scientists predicted that unless significant measures (such as seeking out and protecting old growth forests that have not been disturbed) are taken on a worldwide basis, by 2030 there will only be 10% remaining, with another 10% in a degraded condition. 80% will have been lost, and with them hundreds of thousands of irreplaceable species.\nEstimates vary widely as to the extent of deforestation in the tropics. In 2019, the world lost nearly 12 million hectares of tree cover. Nearly a third of that loss, 3.8 million hectares, occurred within humid tropical primary forests, areas of mature rainforest that are especially important for biodiversity and carbon storage. This is equivalent to losing an area of primary forest the size of a football pitch every six seconds.\nRates of change.\nA 2002 analysis of satellite imagery suggested that the rate of deforestation in the humid tropics (approximately 5.8 million hectares per year) was roughly 23% lower than the most commonly quoted rates. A 2005 report by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) estimated that although the Earth's total forest area continued to decrease at about 13 million hectares per year, the global rate of deforestation had been slowing. On the other hand, a 2005 analysis of satellite images reveals that deforestation of the Amazon rainforest is twice as fast as scientists previously estimated.\nFrom 2010 to 2015, worldwide forest area decreased by 3.3 million ha per year, according to FAO. During this five-year period, the biggest forest area loss occurred in the tropics, particularly in South America and Africa. Per capita forest area decline was also greatest in the tropics and subtropics but is occurring in every climatic domain (except in the temperate) as populations increase.\nAn estimated 420 million ha of forest has been lost worldwide through deforestation since 1990, but the rate of forest loss has declined substantially. In the most recent five-year period (2015\u20132020), the annual rate of deforestation was estimated at 10 million ha, down from 12 million ha in 2010\u20132015.\nAfrica had the largest annual rate of net forest loss in 2010\u20132020, at 3.9 million ha, followed by South America, at 2.6 million ha. The rate of net forest loss has increased in Africa in each of the three decades since 1990. It has declined substantially in South America, however, to about half the rate in 2010\u20132020 compared with 2000\u20132010. Asia had the highest net gain of forest area in 2010\u20132020, followed by Oceania and Europe. Nevertheless, both Europe and Asia recorded substantially lower rates of net gain in 2010\u20132020 than in 2000\u20132010. Oceania experienced net losses of forest area in the decades 1990\u20132000 and 2000\u20132010.\nSome claim that rainforests are being destroyed at an ever-quickening pace. The London-based Rainforest Foundation notes that \"the UN figure is based on a definition of forest as being an area with as little as 10% actual tree cover, which would therefore include areas that are actually savanna-like ecosystems and badly damaged forests\". Other critics of the FAO data point out that they do not distinguish between forest types, and that they are based largely on reporting from forestry departments of individual countries, which do not take into account unofficial activities like illegal logging. Despite these uncertainties, there is agreement that destruction of rainforests remains a significant environmental problem.\nThe rate of net forest loss declined from 7.8 million ha per year in the decade 1990\u20132000 to 5.2 million ha per year in 2000\u20132010 and 4.7 million ha per year in 2010\u20132020. The rate of decline of net forest loss slowed in the most recent decade due to a reduction in the rate of forest expansion.\nReforestation and afforestation.\nIn many parts of the world, especially in East Asian countries, reforestation and afforestation are increasing the area of forested lands. The amount of forest has increased in 22 of the world's 50 most forested nations. Asia as a whole gained 1 million hectares of forest between 2000 and 2005. Tropical forest in El Salvador expanded more than 20% between 1992 and 2001. Based on these trends, one study projects that global forestation will increase by 10%\u2014an area the size of India\u2014by 2050. 36% of globally planted forest area is in East Asia \u2013 around 950,000 square kilometers. From those 87% are in China.\nStatus by region.\nRates of deforestation vary around the world. Up to 90% of West Africa's coastal rainforests have disappeared since 1900. Madagascar has lost 90% of its eastern rainforests. In South Asia, about 88% of the rainforests have been lost.\nMexico, India, the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand, Burma, Malaysia, Bangladesh, China, Sri Lanka, Laos, Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Guinea, Ghana and the Ivory Coast, have lost large areas of their rainforest.\nMuch of what remains of the world's rainforests is in the Amazon basin, where the Amazon Rainforest covers approximately 4 million square kilometres. Some 80% of the deforestation of the Amazon can be attributed to cattle ranching, as Brazil is the largest exporter of beef in the world. The Amazon region has become one of the largest cattle ranching territories in the world. The regions with the highest tropical deforestation rate between 2000 and 2005 were Central America\u2014which lost 1.3% of its forests each year\u2014and tropical Asia. In Central America, two-thirds of lowland tropical forests have been turned into pasture since 1950 and 40% of all the rainforests have been lost in the last 40 years. Brazil has lost 90\u201395% of its Mata Atl\u00e2ntica forest. Deforestation in Brazil increased by 88% for the month of June 2019, as compared with the previous year. However, Brazil still destroyed 1.3 million hectares in 2019. Brazil is one of several countries that have declared their deforestation a national emergency. \nParaguay was losing its natural semi-humid forests in the country's western regions at a rate of 15,000 hectares at a randomly studied 2-month period in 2010. In 2009, Paraguay's parliament refused to pass a law that would have stopped cutting of natural forests altogether.\nAs of 2007, less than 50% of Haiti's forests remained.\nFrom 2015 to 2019, the rate of deforestation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo doubled. In 2021, deforestation of the Congolese rainforest increased by 5%.\nThe World Wildlife Fund's ecoregion project catalogues habitat types throughout the world, including habitat loss such as deforestation, showing for example that even in the rich forests of parts of Canada such as the Mid-Continental Canadian forests of the prairie provinces half of the forest cover has been lost or altered.\nIn 2011, Conservation International listed the top 10 most endangered forests, characterized by having all lost 90% or more of their original habitat, and each harboring at least 1500 endemic plant species (species found nowhere else in the world).\n, it is estimated that 70% of the world's forests are within one kilometer of a forest edge, where they are most prone to human interference and destruction.\nBy country.\nDeforestation in particular countries:\nCauses.\nAgricultural expansion continues to be the main driver of deforestation and forest fragmentation and the associated loss of forest biodiversity. Large-scale commercial agriculture (primarily cattle ranching and cultivation of soya bean and oil palm) accounted for 40 percent of tropical deforestation between 2000 and 2010, and local subsistence agriculture for another 33 percent. Trees are cut down for use as building material, timber or sold as fuel (sometimes in the form of charcoal or timber), while cleared land is used as pasture for livestock and agricultural crops.\nThe vast majority of agricultural activity resulting in deforestation is subsidized by government tax revenue. Disregard of ascribed value, lax forest management, and deficient environmental laws are some of the factors that lead to large-scale deforestation.\nThe types of drivers vary greatly depending on the region in which they take place. The regions with the greatest amount of deforestation for livestock and row crop agriculture are Central and South America, while commodity crop deforestation was found mainly in Southeast Asia. The region with the greatest forest loss due to shifting agriculture was sub-Saharan Africa.\nAgriculture.\nThe overwhelming direct cause of deforestation is agriculture. Subsistence farming is responsible for 48% of deforestation; commercial agriculture is responsible for 32%; logging is responsible for 14%, and fuel wood removals make up 5%.\nMore than 80% of deforestation was attributed to agriculture in 2018. Forests are being converted to plantations for coffee, tea, palm oil, rice, rubber, and various other popular products. The rising demand for certain products and global trade arrangements causes forest conversions, which ultimately leads to soil erosion. The top soil oftentimes erodes after forests are cleared which leads to sediment increase in rivers and streams.\nMost deforestation also occurs in tropical regions. The estimated amount of total land mass used by agriculture is around 38%.\nSince 1960, roughly 15% of the Amazon has been removed with the intention of replacing the land with agricultural practices. It is no coincidence that Brazil has recently become the world's largest beef exporter at the same time that the Amazon rainforest is being clear cut.\nAnother prevalent method of agricultural deforestation is slash-and-burn agriculture, which was primarily used by subsistence farmers in tropical regions but has now become increasingly less sustainable. The method does not leave land for continuous agricultural production but instead cuts and burns small plots of forest land which are then converted into agricultural zones. The farmers then exploit the nutrients in the ashes of the burned plants. As well as, intentionally set fires can possibly lead to devastating measures when unintentionally spreading fire to more land, which can result in the destruction of the protective canopy.\nThe repeated cycle of low yields and shortened fallow periods eventually results in less vegetation being able to grow on once burned lands and a decrease in average soil biomass. In small local plots sustainability is not an issue because of longer fallow periods and lesser overall deforestation. The relatively small size of the plots allowed for no net input of to be released.\nLivestock ranching.\nConsumption and production of beef is the primary driver of deforestation in the Amazon, with around 80% of all converted land being used to rear cattle. 91% of Amazon land deforested since 1970 has been converted to cattle ranching.\nLivestock ranching requires large portions of land to raise herds of animals and livestock crops for consumer needs. According to the World Wildlife Fund, \"Extensive cattle ranching is the number one culprit of deforestation in virtually every Amazon country, and it accounts for 80% of current deforestation.\"\nThe cattle industry is responsible for a significant amount of methane emissions since 60% of all mammals on earth are livestock cows. Replacing forest land with pastures creates a loss of forest stock, which leads to the implication of increased greenhouse gas emissions by burning agriculture methodologies and land-use change.\nWood industry.\nA large contributing factor to deforestation is the lumber industry. A total of almost of timber, or about 1.3% of all forest land, is harvested each year. In addition, the increasing demand for low-cost timber products only supports the lumber company to continue logging.\nExperts do not agree on whether industrial logging is an important contributor to global deforestation. Some argue that poor people are more likely to clear forest because they have no alternatives, others that the poor lack the ability to pay for the materials and labour needed to clear forest.\nEconomic development.\nOther causes of contemporary deforestation may include corruption of government institutions, the inequitable distribution of wealth and power, population growth and overpopulation, and urbanization. The impact of population growth on deforestation has been contested. One study found that population increases due to high fertility rates were a primary driver of tropical deforestation in only 8% of cases. In 2000 the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) found that \"the role of population dynamics in a local setting may vary from decisive to negligible\", and that deforestation can result from \"a combination of population pressure and stagnating economic, social and technological conditions\".\nGlobalization is often viewed as another root cause of deforestation, though there are cases in which the impacts of globalization (new flows of labor, capital, commodities, and ideas) have promoted localized forest recovery.\nThe degradation of forest ecosystems has also been traced to economic incentives that make forest conversion appear more profitable than forest conservation. Many important forest functions have no markets, and hence, no economic value that is readily apparent to the forests' owners or the communities that rely on forests for their well-being. \nSome commentators have noted a shift in the drivers of deforestation over the past 30 years. Whereas deforestation was primarily driven by subsistence activities and government-sponsored development projects like transmigration in countries like Indonesia and colonization in Latin America, India, Java, and so on, during the late 19th century and the first half of the 20th century, by the 1990s the majority of deforestation was caused by industrial factors, including extractive industries, large-scale cattle ranching, and extensive agriculture. Since 2001, commodity-driven deforestation, which is more likely to be permanent, has accounted for about a quarter of all forest disturbance, and this loss has been concentrated in South America and Southeast Asia.\nAs the human population grows, new homes, communities, and expansions of cities will occur, leading to an increase in roads to connect these communities. Rural roads promote economic development but also facilitate deforestation. About 90% of the deforestation has occurred within 100\u00a0km of roads in most parts of the Amazon.\nMining.\nThe importance of mining as a cause of deforestation increased quickly in the beginning the 21st century, among other because of increased demand for minerals. The direct impact of mining is relatively small, but the indirect impacts are much more significant. More than a third of the earth's forests are possibly impacted, at some level and in the years 2001\u20132021, \"755,861 km2... ...had been deforested by causes indirectly related to mining activities alongside other deforestation drivers (based on data from WWF)\"\nIn the year 2023, mining, including for the elements needed for the energy transition strongly contributed to deforestation. Mining is a particular threat to biodiversity: \"in 2019, 79 percent of global metal ore extraction originated from five of the six most species-rich biomes\".\nClimate change.\nAnother cause of deforestation is due to the effects of climate change: More wildfires, insect outbreaks, invasive species, and more frequent extreme weather events (such as storms) are factors that increase deforestation.\nA study suggests that \"tropical, arid and temperate forests are experiencing a significant decline in resilience, probably related to increased water limitations and climate variability\" which may shift ecosystems towards critical transitions and ecosystem collapses.&lt;ref name=\"10.1038/s41586-022-04959-9\"&gt;\n23% of tree cover losses result from wildfires and climate change increase their frequency and power. The rising temperatures cause massive wildfires especially in the Boreal forests. One possible effect is the change of the forest composition. Deforestation can also cause forests to become more fire prone through mechanisms such as logging.\nMilitary causes.\nOperations in war can also cause deforestation. For example, in the 1945 Battle of Okinawa, bombardment and other combat operations reduced a lush tropical landscape into \"a vast field of mud, lead, decay and maggots\".\nDeforestation can also result from the intentional tactics of military forces. Clearing forests became an element in the Russian Empire's successful conquest of the Caucasus in the mid-19th century.\nThe British (during the Malayan Emergency) and the United States (in the Korean War and in the Vietnam War) used defoliants (like Agent Orange or others). The destruction of forests in Vietnam War is one of the most commonly used examples of ecocide, including by Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme, lawyers, historians and other academics.\nImpacts.\nOn atmosphere and climate.\nDeforestation is a major contributor to climate change. It is often cited as one of the major causes of the enhanced greenhouse effect. Recent calculations suggest that CO2 emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (excluding peatland emissions) contribute about 12% of total anthropogenic CO2 emissions, with a range from 6% to 17%. A 2022 study shows annual carbon emissions from tropical deforestation have doubled during the last two decades and continue to increase: by 0.97\u2009\u00b1 0.16\u2009PgC\u2009(petagrams of carbon, i.e. billions of tons) per year in 2001\u20132005 to 1.99\u2009\u00b1 0.13\u2009PgC\u2009per year in 2015\u20132019.\nAccording to a review, north of 50\u00b0N, large scale deforestation leads to an overall net global cooling; but deforestation in the tropics leads to substantial warming: not just due to impacts, but also due to other biophysical mechanisms (making carbon-centric metrics inadequate). Moreover, it suggests that standing tropical forests help cool the average global temperature by more than 1\u00a0\u00b0C. According to a later study, deforestation in northern latitudes can also increase warming, while the conclusion about cooling from deforestation in these areas made by previous studies results from the failure of models to properly capture the effects of evapotranspiration. \nThe incineration and burning of forest plants to clear land releases large amounts of CO2, which contributes to global warming. Scientists also state that tropical deforestation releases 1.5 billion tons of carbon each year into the atmosphere.\nCarbon sink or source.\nA study suggests logged and structurally degraded tropical forests are carbon sources for at least a decade \u2013 even when recovering \u2013 due to larger carbon losses from soil organic matter and deadwood, indicating that the tropical forest carbon sink (at least in South Asia) \"may be much smaller than previously estimated\", contradicting that \"recovering logged and degraded tropical forests are net carbon sinks\".\nOn the environment.\nAccording to a 2020 study, if deforestation continues at current rates it can trigger a total or almost total extinction of humanity in the next 20 to 40 years. They conclude that \"from a statistical point of view... the probability that our civilisation survives itself is less than 10% in the most optimistic scenario.\" To avoid this collapse, humanity should pass from a civilization dominated by the economy to \"cultural society\" that \"privileges the interest of the ecosystem above the individual interest of its components, but eventually in accordance with the overall communal interest.\"\nChanges to the water cycle.\nThe water cycle is also affected by deforestation. Trees extract groundwater through their roots and release it into the atmosphere. When part of a forest is removed, the trees no longer transpire this water, resulting in a much drier climate. Deforestation reduces the content of water in the soil and groundwater as well as atmospheric moisture. The dry soil leads to lower water intake for the trees to extract. Deforestation reduces soil cohesion, so that erosion, flooding and landslides ensue.\nShrinking forest cover lessens the landscape's capacity to intercept, retain and transpire precipitation. Instead of trapping precipitation, which then percolates to groundwater systems, deforested areas become sources of surface water runoff, which moves much faster than subsurface flows. Forests return most of the water that falls as precipitation to the atmosphere by transpiration. In contrast, when an area is deforested, almost all precipitation is lost as run-off. That quicker transport of surface water can translate into flash flooding and more localized floods than would occur with the forest cover. Deforestation also contributes to decreased evapotranspiration, which lessens atmospheric moisture which in some cases affects precipitation levels downwind from the deforested area, as water is not recycled to downwind forests, but is lost in runoff and returns directly to the oceans. According to one study, in deforested north and northwest China, the average annual precipitation decreased by one third between the 1950s and the 1980s.\nTrees, and plants in general, affect the water cycle significantly:\nAs a result, the presence or absence of trees can change the quantity of water on the surface, in the soil or groundwater, or in the atmosphere. This in turn changes erosion rates and the availability of water for either ecosystem functions or human services. Deforestation on lowland plains moves cloud formation and rainfall to higher elevations.\nThe forest may have little impact on flooding in the case of large rainfall events, which overwhelm the storage capacity of forest soil if the soils are at or close to saturation.\nTropical rainforests produce about 30% of Earth's fresh water.\nDeforestation disrupts normal weather patterns creating hotter and drier weather thus increasing drought, desertification, crop failures, melting of the polar ice caps, coastal flooding and displacement of major vegetation regimes.\nSoil erosion.\nDue to surface plant litter, forests that are undisturbed have a minimal rate of erosion. The rate of erosion occurs from deforestation, because it decreases the amount of litter cover, which provides protection from surface runoff. The rate of erosion is around 2 metric tons per square kilometre. This can be an advantage in excessively leached tropical rain forest soils. Forestry operations themselves also increase erosion through the development of (forest) roads and the use of mechanized equipment.\nDeforestation in China's Loess Plateau many years ago has led to soil erosion; this erosion has led to valleys opening up. The increase of soil in the runoff causes the Yellow River to flood and makes it yellow-colored.\nGreater erosion is not always a consequence of deforestation, as observed in the southwestern regions of the US. In these areas, the loss of grass due to the presence of trees and other shrubbery leads to more erosion than when trees are removed.\nSoils are reinforced by the presence of trees, which secure the soil by binding their roots to soil bedrock. Due to deforestation, the removal of trees causes sloped lands to be more susceptible to landslides.\nOther changes to the soil.\nClearing forests changes the environment of the microbial communities within the soil, and causes a loss of biodiversity in regards to the microbes since biodiversity is actually highly dependent on soil texture. Although the effect of deforestation has much more profound consequences on sandier soils compared to clay-like soils, the disruptions caused by deforestation ultimately reduces properties of soil such as hydraulic conductivity and water storage, thus reducing the efficiency of water and heat absorption. In a simulation of the deforestation process in the Amazon, researchers found that surface and soil temperatures increased by 1 to 3 degrees Celsius demonstrating the loss of the soil's ability to absorb radiation and moisture. Furthermore, soils that are rich in organic decay matter are more susceptible to fire, especially during long droughts.\nChanges in soil properties could turn the soil itself into a carbon source rather than a carbon sink.\nBiodiversity loss.\nDeforestation on a human scale results in decline in biodiversity, and on a natural global scale is known to cause the extinction of many species. The removal or destruction of areas of forest cover has resulted in a degraded environment with reduced biodiversity. Forests support biodiversity, providing habitat for wildlife; moreover, forests foster medicinal conservation. With forest biotopes being irreplaceable source of new drugs (such as taxol), deforestation can destroy genetic variations (such as crop resistance) irretrievably.\nSince the tropical rainforests are the most diverse ecosystems on Earth and about 80% of the world's known biodiversity can be found in tropical rainforests, removal or destruction of significant areas of forest cover has resulted in a degraded environment with reduced biodiversity. Road construction and development of adjacent land, which greatly reduces the area of intact wilderness and causes soil erosion, is a major contributing factor to the loss of biodiversity in tropical regions. A study in Rond\u00f4nia, Brazil, has shown that deforestation also removes the microbial community which is involved in the recycling of nutrients, the production of clean water and the removal of pollutants.\nIt has been estimated that 137 plant, animal and insect species go extinct every day due to rainforest deforestation, which equates to 50,000 species a year. Others state that tropical rainforest deforestation is contributing to the ongoing Holocene mass extinction. The known extinction rates from deforestation rates are very low, approximately one species per year from mammals and birds, which extrapolates to approximately 23,000 species per year for all species. Predictions have been made that more than 40% of the animal and plant species in Southeast Asia could be wiped out in the 21st century. Such predictions were called into question by 1995 data that show that within regions of Southeast Asia much of the original forest has been converted to monospecific plantations, but that potentially endangered species are few and tree flora remains widespread and stable.\nScientific understanding of the process of extinction is insufficient to accurately make predictions about the impact of deforestation on biodiversity. Most predictions of forestry related biodiversity loss are based on species-area models, with an underlying assumption that as the forest declines species diversity will decline similarly. However, many such models have been proven to be wrong and loss of habitat does not necessarily lead to large scale loss of species. Species-area models are known to overpredict the number of species known to be threatened in areas where actual deforestation is ongoing, and greatly overpredict the number of threatened species that are widespread.\nIn 2012, a study of the Brazilian Amazon predicts that despite a lack of extinctions thus far, up to 90 percent of predicted extinctions will finally occur in the next 40 years.\nOxygen-supply misconception.\nRainforests are widely believed by lay persons to contribute a significant amount of the world's oxygen, although it is now accepted by scientists that rainforests contribute little net oxygen to the atmosphere and deforestation has only a minor effect on atmospheric oxygen levels. In fact about 50 percent of oxygen on Earth is produced by algae.\nOn human health.\nDeforestation reduces safe working hours for millions of people in the tropics, especially for those performing heavy labour outdoors. Continued global heating and forest loss is expected to amplify these impacts, reducing work hours for vulnerable groups even more. A study conducted from 2002 to 2018 also determined that the increase in temperature as a result of climate change, and the lack of shade due to deforestation, has increased the mortality rate of workers in Indonesia.\nInfectious diseases.\nDeforestation eliminates a great number of species of plants and animals which also often results in exposure of people to zoonotic diseases. Forest-associated diseases include malaria, Chagas disease (also known as American trypanosomiasis), African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness), leishmaniasis, Lyme disease, HIV and Ebola. The majority of new infectious diseases affecting humans, including the SARS-CoV-2 virus that caused the COVID-19 pandemic, are zoonotic and their emergence may be linked to habitat loss due to forest area change and the expansion of human populations into forest areas, which both increase human exposure to wildlife.\nDeforestation has been coupled with an increase in the occurrence of disease outbreaks. In Malaysia, thousands of acres of forest have been cleared for pig farms. This has resulted in an increase in the spread of the Nipah virus. In Kenya, deforestation has led to an increase in malaria cases which is now the leading cause of morbidity and mortality the country. A 2017 study found that deforestation substantially increased the incidence of malaria in Nigeria.\nAnother pathway through which deforestation affects disease is the relocation and dispersion of disease-carrying hosts. This disease emergence pathway can be called \"range expansion\", whereby the host's range (and thereby the range of pathogens) expands to new geographic areas. Through deforestation, hosts and reservoir species are forced into neighboring habitats. Accompanying the reservoir species are pathogens that have the ability to find new hosts in previously unexposed regions. As these pathogens and species come into closer contact with humans, they are infected both directly and indirectly. Another example of range expansion due to deforestation and other anthropogenic habitat impacts includes the Capybara rodent in Paraguay.\nAccording to the World Economic Forum, 31% of emerging diseases are linked to deforestation. A publication by the United Nations Environment Programme in 2016 found that deforestation, climate change, and livestock agriculture are among the main causes that increase the risk of zoonotic diseases, that is diseases that pass from animals to humans.\nCOVID-19 pandemic.\nScientists have linked the Coronavirus pandemic to the destruction of nature, especially to deforestation, habitat loss in general and wildlife trade. According to the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) the Coronavirus disease 2019 is zoonotic, e.g., the virus passed from animals to humans. UNEP concludes that: \"The most fundamental way to protect ourselves from zoonotic diseases is to prevent destruction of nature. Where ecosystems are healthy and biodiverse, they are resilient, adaptable and help to regulate diseases.\nOn the economy and agriculture.\nEconomic losses due to deforestation in Brazil could reach around 317 billion dollars per year, approximately 7 times higher in comparison to the cost of all commodities produced through deforestation.\nThe forest products industry is a large part of the economy in both developed and developing countries. Short-term economic gains made by conversion of forest to agriculture, or over-exploitation of wood products, typically leads to a loss of long-term income and long-term biological productivity. West Africa, Madagascar, Southeast Asia and many other regions have experienced lower revenue because of declining timber harvests. Illegal logging causes billions of dollars of losses to national economies annually.\nThe resilience of human food systems and their capacity to adapt to future change is linked to biodiversity \u2013 including dryland-adapted shrub and tree species that help combat desertification, forest-dwelling insects, bats and bird species that pollinate crops, trees with extensive root systems in mountain ecosystems that prevent soil erosion, and mangrove species that provide resilience against flooding in coastal areas. With climate change exacerbating the risks to food systems, the role of forests in capturing and storing carbon and mitigating climate change is important for the agricultural sector.\nMonitoring.\nThere are multiple methods that are appropriate and reliable for reducing and monitoring deforestation. One method is the \"visual interpretation of aerial photos or satellite imagery that is labor-intensive but does not require high-level training in computer image processing or extensive computational resources\". Another method includes hot-spot analysis (that is, locations of rapid change) using expert opinion or coarse resolution satellite data to identify locations for detailed digital analysis with high resolution satellite images. Deforestation is typically assessed by quantifying the amount of area deforested, measured at the present time.\nFrom an environmental point of view, quantifying the damage and its possible consequences is a more important task, while conservation efforts are more focused on forested land protection and development of land-use alternatives to avoid continued deforestation. Deforestation rate and total area deforested have been widely used for monitoring deforestation in many regions, including the Brazilian Amazon deforestation monitoring by INPE. A global satellite view is available, an example of land change science monitoring of land cover over time.\nSatellite imaging has become crucial in obtaining data on levels of deforestation and reforestation. Landsat satellite data, for example, has been used to map tropical deforestation as part of NASA's Landsat \"Pathfinder Humid Tropical Deforestation Project\". The project yielded deforestation maps for the Amazon Basin, Central Africa, and Southeast Asia for three periods in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s.\nGreenpeace has mapped out the forests that are still intact and published this information on the internet. World Resources Institute in turn has made a simpler thematic map showing the amount of forests present just before the age of man (8000 years ago) and the current (reduced) levels of forest.\nControl.\nInternational, national and subnational policies.\nPolicies for forest protection include information and education programs, economic measures to increase revenue returns from authorized activities and measures to increase effectiveness of \"forest technicians and forest managers\". Poverty and agricultural rent were found to be principal factors leading to deforestation. Contemporary domestic and foreign political decision-makers could possibly create and implement policies whose outcomes ensure that economic activities in critical forests are consistent with their scientifically ascribed value for ecosystem services, climate change mitigation and other purposes.\nSuch policies may use and organize the development of complementary technical and economic means \u2013 including for lower levels of beef production, sales and consumption (which would also have major benefits for climate change mitigation), higher levels of specified other economic activities in such areas (such as reforestation, forest protection, sustainable agriculture for specific classes of food products and quaternary work in general), product information requirements, practice- and product-certifications and eco-tariffs, along with the required monitoring and traceability. Inducing the creation and enforcement of such policies could, for instance, achieve a global phase-out of deforestation-associated beef. With complex polycentric governance measures, goals like sufficient climate change mitigation as decided with e.g. the Paris Agreement and a stoppage of deforestation by 2030 as decided at the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference could be achieved.&lt;ref name=\"10.1017/sus.2021.21\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; A study has suggested higher income nations need to reduce imports of tropical forest-related products and help with theoretically forest-related socioeconomic development. Proactive government policies and international forest policies \"revisit[ing] and redesign[ing] global forest trade\" are needed as well.\nIn 2022 the European parliament approved a bill aiming to stop the import linked with deforestation. This EU Regulation on Deforestation-free products (EUDR), may cause to Brazil, for example, to stop deforestation for agricultural production and begun to \"increase productivity on existing agricultural land\". The legislation was adopted with some changes by the European Council in May 2023 and is expected to enter into force several weeks after. The bill requires companies who want to import certain types of products to the European Union to prove the production of those commodities is not linked to areas deforested after 31 of December 2020. It prohibits also import of products linked with Human rights abuse. The list of products includes: palm oil, cattle, wood, coffee, cocoa, rubber and soy. Some derivatives of those products are also included: chocolate, furniture, printed paper and several palm oil based derivates.\nBut unfortunately, as the report \"Bankrolling ecosystem destruction\" shows, this regulation of product imports is not enough. The European financial sector is investing billions of euros in the destruction of nature. Banks do not respond positively to requests to stop this, which is why the report calls for European regulation in this area to be tightened and for banks to be banned from continuing to finance deforestation.\nInternational pledges.\nIn 2014, about 40 countries signed the New York Declaration on Forests, a voluntary pledge to halve deforestation by 2020 and end it by 2030. The agreement was not legally binding, however, and some key countries, such as Brazil, China, and Russia, did not sign onto it. As a result, the effort failed, and deforestation increased from 2014 to 2020.\nIn November 2021, 141 countries (with around 85% of the world's primary tropical forests and 90% of global tree cover) agreed at the COP26 climate summit in Glasgow to the \"Glasgow Leaders' Declaration on Forests and Land Use\", a pledge to end and reverse deforestation by 2030. The agreement was accompanied by about $19.2 billion in associated funding commitments.\nThe 2021 Glasgow agreement improved on the New York Declaration by now including Brazil and many other countries that did not sign the 2014 agreement. Some key nations with high rates of deforestation (including Malaysia, Cambodia, Laos, Paraguay, and Myanmar) have not signed the Glasgow Declaration. Like the earlier agreement, the Glasgow Leaders' Declaration was entered into outside the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and is thus not legally binding.\nIn November 2021, the EU executive outlined a draft law requiring companies to prove that the agricultural commodities beef, wood, palm oil, soy, coffee and cocoa destined for the EU's 450 million consumers were not linked to deforestation. In September 2022, the EU Parliament supported and strengthened the plan from the EU's executive with 453 votes to 57.\nIn 2018 the biggest palm oil trader, Wilmar, decided to control its suppliers to avoid deforestation\nIn 2021, over 100 world leaders, representing countries containing more than 85% of the world's forests, committed to halt and reverse deforestation and land degradation by 2030.\nLand rights.\nIndigenous communities have long been the frontline of resistance against deforestation. Transferring rights over land from public domain to its indigenous inhabitants is argued to be a cost-effective strategy to conserve forests. This includes the protection of such rights entitled in existing laws, such as India's Forest Rights Act. The transferring of such rights in China, perhaps the largest land reform in modern times, has been argued to have increased forest cover. In Brazil, forested areas given tenure to indigenous groups have even lower rates of clearing than national parks.\nCommunity concessions in the Congolian rainforests have significantly less deforestation as communities are incentivized to manage the land sustainably, even reducing poverty.\nForest management.\nIn areas where \"slash-and-burn\" is practiced, switching to \"slash-and-char\" would prevent the rapid deforestation and subsequent degradation of soils. The biochar thus created, given back to the soil, is not only a durable carbon sequestration method, but it also is an extremely beneficial amendment to the soil. Mixed with biomass it brings the creation of terra preta, one of the richest soils on the planet and the only one known to regenerate itself.\nCertification, as provided by global certification systems such as Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification and Forest Stewardship Council, contributes to tackling deforestation by creating market demand for timber from sustainably managed forests. According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), \"A major condition for the adoption of sustainable forest management is a demand for products that are produced sustainably and consumer willingness to pay for the higher costs entailed. [...] By promoting the positive attributes of forest products from sustainably managed forests, certification focuses on the demand side of environmental conservation.\"\nFinancial compensations for reducing emissions from deforestation.\nReducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD) in developing countries has emerged as a new potential to complement ongoing climate policies. The idea consists in providing financial compensations for the reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from deforestation and forest degradation\". REDD can be seen as an alternative to the emissions trading system as in the latter, polluters must pay for permits for the right to emit certain pollutants (i.e. ).\nMain international organizations including the United Nations and the World Bank, have begun to develop programs aimed at curbing deforestation. The blanket term \"Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation\" (REDD) describes these sorts of programs, which use direct monetary or other incentives to encourage developing countries to limit and/or roll back deforestation. Funding has been an issue, but at the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Conference of the Parties-15 (COP-15) in Copenhagen in December 2009, an accord was reached with a collective commitment by developed countries for new and additional resources, including forestry and investments through international institutions, that will approach US$30 billion for the period 2010\u20132012.\nSignificant work is underway on tools for use in monitoring developing countries' adherence to their agreed REDD targets. These tools, which rely on remote forest monitoring using satellite imagery and other data sources, include the Center for Global Development's FORMA (Forest Monitoring for Action) initiative and the Group on Earth Observations' Forest Carbon Tracking Portal. Methodological guidance for forest monitoring was also emphasized at COP-15. The environmental organization Avoided Deforestation Partners leads the campaign for development of REDD through funding from the U.S. government.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe Carboniferous Rainforest Collapse was an event that occurred 300 million years ago. Climate change devastated tropical rainforests causing the extinction of many plant and animal species. The change was abrupt, specifically, at this time climate became cooler and drier, conditions that are not favorable to the growth of rainforests and much of the biodiversity within them. Rainforests were fragmented forming shrinking 'islands' further and further apart. Populations such as the sub class Lissamphibia were devastated, whereas Reptilia survived the collapse. The surviving organisms were better adapted to the drier environment left behind and served as legacies in succession after the collapse.\nRainforests once covered 14% of the earth's land surface; now they cover a mere 6% and experts estimate that the last remaining rainforests could be consumed in less than 40 years.\nSmall scale deforestation was practiced by some societies for tens of thousands of years before the beginnings of civilization. The first evidence of deforestation appears in the Mesolithic period. It was probably used to convert closed forests into more open ecosystems favourable to game animals. With the advent of agriculture, larger areas began to be deforested, and fire became the prime tool to clear land for crops. In Europe there is little solid evidence before 7000 BC. Mesolithic foragers used fire to create openings for red deer and wild boar. In Great Britain, shade-tolerant species such as oak and ash are replaced in the pollen record by hazels, brambles, grasses and nettles. Removal of the forests led to decreased transpiration, resulting in the formation of upland peat bogs. Widespread decrease in elm pollen across Europe between 8400 and 8300 BC and 7200\u20137000 BC, starting in southern Europe and gradually moving north to Great Britain, may represent land clearing by fire at the onset of Neolithic agriculture.\nThe Neolithic period saw extensive deforestation for farming land. Stone axes were being made from about 3000 BC not just from flint, but from a wide variety of hard rocks from across Britain and North America as well. They include the noted Langdale axe industry in the English Lake District, quarries developed at Penmaenmawr in North Wales and numerous other locations. Rough-outs were made locally near the quarries, and some were polished locally to give a fine finish. This step not only increased the mechanical strength of the axe, but also made penetration of wood easier. Flint was still used from sources such as Grimes Graves but from many other mines across Europe.\nEvidence of deforestation has been found in Minoan Crete; for example the environs of the Palace of Knossos were severely deforested in the Bronze Age.\nPre-industrial history.\nJust as archaeologists have shown that prehistoric farming societies had to cut or burn forests before planting, documents and artifacts from early civilizations often reveal histories of deforestation. Some of the most dramatic are eighth century BCE Assyrian reliefs depicting logs being floated downstream from conquered areas to the less forested capital region as spoils of war. Ancient Chinese texts make clear that some areas of the Yellow River valley had already destroyed many of their forests over 2000 years ago and had to plant trees as crops or import them from long distances. In South China much of the land came to be privately owned and used for the commercial growing of timber.\nThree regional studies of historic erosion and alluviation in ancient Greece found that, wherever adequate evidence exists, a major phase of erosion follows the introduction of farming in the various regions of Greece by about 500\u20131,000 years, ranging from the later Neolithic to the Early Bronze Age. The thousand years following the mid-first millennium BC saw serious, intermittent pulses of soil erosion in numerous places. The historic silting of ports along the southern coasts of Asia Minor (\"e.g.\" Clarus, and the examples of Ephesus, Priene and Miletus, where harbors had to be abandoned because of the silt deposited by the Meander) and in coastal Syria during the last centuries BC.\nEaster Island has suffered from heavy soil erosion in recent centuries, aggravated by agriculture and deforestation. The disappearance of the island's trees seems to coincide with a decline of its civilization around the 17th and 18th century. Scholars have attributed the collapse to deforestation and over-exploitation of all resources.\nThe famous silting up of the harbor for Bruges, which moved port commerce to Antwerp, also followed a period of increased settlement growth (and apparently of deforestation) in the upper river basins. In early medieval Riez in upper Provence, alluvial silt from two small rivers raised the riverbeds and widened the floodplain, which slowly buried the Roman settlement in alluvium and gradually moved new construction to higher ground; concurrently the headwater valleys above Riez were being opened to pasturage.\nA typical progress trap was that cities were often built in a forested area, which would provide wood for some industry (for example, construction, shipbuilding, pottery). When deforestation occurs without proper replanting, however; local wood supplies become difficult to obtain near enough to remain competitive, leading to the city's abandonment, as happened repeatedly in Ancient Asia Minor. Because of fuel needs, mining and metallurgy often led to deforestation and city abandonment.\nWith most of the population remaining active in (or indirectly dependent on) the agricultural sector, the main pressure in most areas remained land clearing for crop and cattle farming. Enough wild green was usually left standing (and partially used, for example, to collect firewood, timber and fruits, or to graze pigs) for wildlife to remain viable. The elite's (nobility and higher clergy) protection of their own hunting privileges and game often protected significant woodland.\nMajor parts in the spread (and thus more durable growth) of the population were played by monastical 'pioneering' (especially by the Benedictine and Commercial orders) and some feudal lords' recruiting farmers to settle (and become tax payers) by offering relatively good legal and fiscal conditions. Even when speculators sought to encourage towns, settlers needed an agricultural belt around or sometimes within defensive walls. When populations were quickly decreased by causes such as the Black Death, the colonization of the Americas, or devastating warfare (for example, Genghis Khan's Mongol hordes in eastern and central Europe, Thirty Years' War in Germany), this could lead to settlements being abandoned. The land was reclaimed by nature, but the secondary forests usually lacked the original biodiversity. The Mongol invasions and conquests alone resulted in the reduction of 700 million tons of carbon from the atmosphere by enabling the re-growth of carbon-absorbing forests on depopulated lands over a significant period of time.\nFrom 1100 to 1500 AD, significant deforestation took place in Western Europe as a result of the expanding human population. The large-scale building of wooden sailing ships by European (coastal) naval owners since the 15th century for exploration, colonisation, slave trade, and other trade on the high seas, consumed many forest resources and became responsible for the introduction of numerous bubonic plague outbreaks in the 14th century. Piracy also contributed to the over harvesting of forests, as in Spain. This led to a weakening of the domestic economy after Columbus' discovery of America, as the economy became dependent on colonial activities (plundering, mining, cattle, plantations, trade, etc.)\nThe massive use of charcoal on an industrial scale in Early Modern Europe was a new type of consumption of western forests. Each of Nelson's Royal Navy war ships at Trafalgar (1805) required 6,000 mature oaks for its construction. In France, Colbert planted oak forests to supply the French navy in the future. When the oak plantations matured in the mid-19th century, the masts were no longer required because shipping had changed.\nEfforts to stop or slow deforestation have been attempted for many centuries because it has long been known that deforestation can cause environmental damage sufficient in some cases to cause societies to collapse. In Tonga, paramount rulers developed policies designed to prevent conflicts between short-term gains from converting forest to farmland and long-term problems forest loss would cause, while during the 17th and 18th centuries in Tokugawa, Japan, the sh\u014dguns developed a highly sophisticated system of long-term planning to stop and even reverse deforestation of the preceding centuries through substituting timber by other products and more efficient use of land that had been farmed for many centuries. \nIn 16th-century Germany, landowners also developed silviculture to deal with the problem of deforestation. However, these policies tend to be limited to environments with \"good rainfall\", \"no dry season\" and \"very young soils\" (through volcanism or glaciation). This is because on older and less fertile soils trees grow too slowly for silviculture to be economic, whilst in areas with a strong dry season there is always a risk of forest fires destroying a tree crop before it matures.\n19th and 20th centuries.\nSteamboats.\nIn the 19th century, the introduction of steamboats in the United States was the cause of deforestation of banks of major rivers, such as the Mississippi River, with increased and more severe flooding one of the environmental results. The steamboat crews cut wood daily from the riverbanks to fuel the steam engines. Between St. Louis and the confluence with the Ohio River to the south, the Mississippi became broader and shallower and changed its channel laterally. Attempts to improve navigation by the use of snag pullers often resulted in crews' clearing large trees 100 to back from the banks. Several French colonial towns of the Illinois Country, such as Kaskaskia, Cahokia and St. Philippe, Illinois, were flooded and abandoned in the late 19th century, with a loss to the cultural record of their archeology.\nSociety and culture.\nDifferent cultures of different places in the world have different interpretations of the actions of the cutting down of trees. For example, in Meitei mythology and Meitei folklore of Manipur (India), deforestation is mentioned as one of the reasons to make mother nature weep and mourn for the death of her precious children."}
{"id": "8104", "revid": "1263455207", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8104", "title": "Desertification", "text": "Desertification is a type of gradual land degradation of fertile land into arid desert due to a combination of natural processes and human activities.\nThe immediate cause of desertification is the loss of most vegetation. This is driven by a number of factors, alone or in combination, such as drought, climatic shifts, tillage for agriculture, overgrazing and deforestation for fuel or construction materials. Though vegetation plays a major role in determining the biological composition of the soil, studies have shown that, in many environments, the rate of erosion and runoff decreases exponentially with increased vegetation cover. Unprotected, dry soil surfaces blow away with the wind or are washed away by flash floods, leaving infertile lower soil layers that bake in the sun and become an unproductive hardpan. This spread of arid areas is caused by a variety of factors, such as overexploitation of soil as a result of human activity and the effects of climate change.\nAt least 90% of the inhabitants of drylands live in developing countries, where they also suffer from poor economic and social conditions. This situation is exacerbated by land degradation because of the reduction in productivity, the precariousness of living conditions and the difficulty of access to resources and opportunities.\nGeographic areas most affected are located in Africa (Sahel region), Asia (Gobi Desert and Mongolia) and parts of South America. Drylands occupy approximately 40\u201341% of Earth's land area and are home to more than 2\u00a0billion people. Effects of desertification include sand and dust storms, food insecurity, and poverty.\nMethods of mitigating or reversing desertification include improving soil quality, greening deserts, managing grazing, and tree-planting (reforestation and afforestation).\nThroughout geological history, the development of deserts has occurred naturally over long intervals of time. The modern study of desertification emerged from the study of the 1980s drought in the Sahel.\nDefinitions.\nDesertification is a gradual process of increased soil aridity. Desertification has been defined in the text of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) as \"land degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid regions resulting from various factors, including climatic variations and human activities.\"\nDefinition of Desert \u2013 That area of the earth where the sum of rain and snowfall is much less than other areas, where the annual average rainfall is less than 25CM. Definition by UNO (1995) \u2013 Land degradation in barren, humid and sub-humid areas due to climate change and human activities is called desertification.\nAs of 2005, considerable controversy existed over the proper definition of the term \"desertification\" with more than 100 formal definitions in existence. The most widely accepted of these was that of the Princeton University Dictionary which defined it as \"the process of fertile land \"transforming into desert\" typically as a result of deforestation, drought or improper/inappropriate agriculture\". This definition clearly demonstrated the interconnectedness of desertification and human activities, in particular land use and land management practices. It also highlighted the economic, social and environmental implications of desertification. However, this original understanding that desertification involved the physical expansion of deserts has been rejected as the concept has further evolved since then.\nThere exists also controversy around the sub-grouping of types of desertification, including, for example, the validity and usefulness of such terms as \"man-made desert\" and \"non-pattern desert\".\nCauses.\nImmediate causes.\nThe immediate cause of desertification is the loss of most vegetation. This is driven by a number of factors, alone or in combination, such as drought, climatic shifts, tillage for agriculture, overgrazing and deforestation for fuel or construction materials. Though vegetation plays a major role in determining the biological composition of the soil, studies have shown that, in many environments, the rate of erosion and runoff decreases exponentially with increased vegetation cover. Unprotected, dry soil surfaces blow away with the wind or are washed away by flash floods, leaving infertile lower soil layers that bake in the sun and become an unproductive hardpan.\nInfluence of human activities.\nEarly studies argued one of the most common causes of desertification was overgrazing, over consumption of vegetation by cattle or other livestock. However, the role of local overexploitation in driving desertification in the recent past is controversial. Drought in the Sahel region is now thought to be principally the result of seasonal variability in rainfall caused by large-scale sea surface temperature variations, largely driven by natural variability and anthropogenic emissions of aerosols (reflective sulphate particles) and greenhouse gases. As a result, changing ocean temperature and reductions in sulfate emissions have caused a re-greening of the region. This has led some scholars to argue that agriculture-induced vegetation loss is a minor factor in desertification.\nHuman population dynamics have a considerable impact on overgrazing, over-farming and deforestation, as previously acceptable techniques have become unsustainable.\nThere are multiple reasons farmers use intensive farming as opposed to extensive farming but the main reason is to maximize yields. By increasing productivity, they require a lot more fertilizer, pesticides, and labor to upkeep machinery. This continuous use of the land rapidly depletes the nutrients of the soil causing desertification to spread.\nNatural variations.\nScientists agree that the existence of a desert in the place where the Sahara desert is now located is due to natural variations in solar insolation due to orbital precession of the Earth. Such variations influence the strength of the West African Monsoon, inducing feedback in vegetation and dust emission that amplify the cycle of wet and dry Sahara climate. There is also a suggestion the transition of the Sahara from savanna to desert during the mid-Holocene was partially due to overgrazing by the cattle of the local population.\nClimate change.\nResearch into desertification is complex, and there is no single metric which can define all aspects. However, more intense climate change is still expected to increase the current extent of drylands on the Earth's continents: from 38% in late 20th century to 50% or 56% by the end of the century, under the \"moderate\" and high-warming Representative Concentration Pathways 4.5 and 8.5. Most of the expansion will be seen over regions such as \"southwest North America, the northern fringe of Africa, southern Africa, and Australia\".\nDrylands cover 41% of the earth's land surface and include 45% of the world's agricultural land. These regions are among the most vulnerable ecosystems to anthropogenic climate and land use change and are under threat of desertification. An observation-based attribution study of desertification was carried out in 2020 which accounted for climate change, climate variability, CO2 fertilization as well as both the gradual and rapid ecosystem changes caused by land use. The study found that, between 1982 and 2015, 6% of the world's drylands underwent desertification driven by unsustainable land use practices compounded by anthropogenic climate change. Despite an average global greening, anthropogenic climate change has degraded 12.6% (5.43 million km2) of drylands, contributing to desertification and affecting 213 million people, 93% of who live in developing economies.\nEffects.\nSand and dust storms.\nThere has been a 25% increase in global annual dust emissions between the late nineteenth century to present day. The increase of desertification has also increased the amount of loose sand and dust that the wind can pick up ultimately resulting in a storm. For example, dust storms in the Middle East \u201care becoming more frequent and intense in recent years\u201d because \u201clong-term reductions in rainfall [cause] lower soil moisture and vegetative cover\u201d.\nDust storms can contribute to certain respiratory disorders such as pneumonia, skin irritations, asthma and many more. They can pollute open water, reduce the effectiveness of clean energy efforts, and halt most forms of transportation.\nDust and sand storms can have a negative effect on the climate which can make desertification worse. Dust particles in the air scatter incoming radiation from the sun (Hassan, 2012). The dust can provide momentary coverage for the ground temperature but the atmospheric temperature will increase. This can disform and shorten the life time of clouds which can result in less rainfall.\nFood insecurity.\nGlobal food security is being threatened by desertification. The more that population grows, the more food that has to be grown. The agricultural business is being displaced from one country to another. For example, Europe on average imports over 50% of its food. Meanwhile, 44% of agricultural land is located in dry lands and it supplies 60% of the world's food production. Desertification is decreasing the amount of sustainable land for agricultural uses but demands are continuously growing. In the near future, the demands will overcome the supply. The violent herder\u2013farmer conflicts in Nigeria, Sudan, Mali and other countries in the Sahel region have been exacerbated by climate change, land degradation and population growth.\nIncreasing poverty.\nAt least 90% of the inhabitants of drylands live in developing countries, where they also suffer from poor economic and social conditions. This situation is exacerbated by land degradation because of the reduction in productivity, the precariousness of living conditions and the difficulty of access to resources and opportunities.\nMany underdeveloped countries are affected by overgrazing, land exhaustion and overdrafting of groundwater due to pressures to exploit marginal drylands for farming. Decision-makers are understandably averse to invest in arid zones with low potential. This absence of investment contributes to the marginalization of these zones. When unfavorable agri-climatic conditions are combined with an absence of infrastructure and access to markets, as well as poorly adapted production techniques and an underfed and undereducated population, most such zones are excluded from development.\nDesertification often causes rural lands to become unable to support the same sized populations that previously lived there. This results in mass migrations out of rural areas and into urban areas particularly in Africa creating unemployment and slums. The number of these environmental refugees grows every year, with projections for sub-Saharan Africa showing a probable increase from 14 million in 2010 to nearly 200 million by 2050. This presents a future crisis for the region, as neighboring nations do not always have the ability to support large populations of refugees.\nIn Mongolia, the land is 90% fragile dry land, which causes many herders to migrate to the city for work. With very limited resources, the herders that stay on the dry land graze very carefully in order to preserve the land.\nAgriculture is a main source of income for many desert communities. The increase in desertification in these regions has degraded the land to such an extent where people can no longer productively farm and make a profit. This has negatively impacted the economy and increased poverty rates.\nThere is, however, increased global advocacy e.g. the UN SDG 15 to combat desertification and restore affected lands.\nGeographic areas affected.\nDrylands occupy approximately 40\u201341% of Earth's land area and are home to more than 2\u00a0billion people. It has been estimated that some 10\u201320% of drylands are already degraded, the total area affected by desertification being between 6 and 12 million square kilometers, that about 1\u20136% of the inhabitants of drylands live in desertified areas, and that a billion people are under threat from further desertification.\nSahel.\nThe impact of climate change and human activities on desertification are exemplified in the Sahel region of Africa. The region is characterized by a dry hot climate, high temperatures and low rainfall (100\u2013600\u00a0mm per year). So, droughts are the rule in the Sahel region. The Sahel has lost approximately 650,000\u00a0km2 of its productive agricultural land over the past 50 years; the propagation of desertification in this area is considerable.\nThe climate of the Sahara has undergone enormous variations over the last few hundred thousand years, oscillating between wet (grassland) and dry (desert) every 20,000 years (a phenomenon believed to be caused by long-term changes in the North African climate cycle that alters the path of the North African Monsoon, caused by an approximately 40,000-year cycle in which the axial tilt of the earth changes between 22\u00b0 and 24.5\u00b0). Some statistics have shown that, since 1900, the Sahara has expanded by 250\u00a0km to the south over a stretch of land from west to east 6,000\u00a0km long.\nLake Chad, located in the Sahel region, has undergone desiccation due to water withdrawal for irrigation and decrease in rainfall. The lake has shrunk by over 90% since 1987, displacing millions of inhabitants. Recent efforts have managed to make some progress toward its restoration, but it is still considered to be at risk of disappearing entirely.\nTo limit desertification, the Great Green Wall (Africa) initiative was started in 2007 involving the planting of vegetation along a stretch of 7,775\u00a0km, 15\u00a0km wide, involving 22 countries to 2030. The purpose of this mammoth planting initiative is to enhance retention of water in the ground following the seasonal rainfall, thus promoting land rehabilitation and future agriculture. Senegal has already contributed to the project by planting 50,000 acres of trees. It is said to have improved land quality and caused an increase in economic opportunity in the region.\nGobi Desert and Mongolia.\nAnother major area that is being impacted by desertification is the Gobi Desert located in Northern China and Southern Mongolia. The Gobi Desert is the fastest expanding desert on Earth, as it transforms over of grassland into wasteland annually. Although the Gobi Desert itself is still a distance away from Beijing, reports from field studies state there are large sand dunes forming only 70\u00a0km (43.5\u00a0mi) outside the city.\nIn Mongolia, around 90% of grassland is considered vulnerable to desertification by the UN. An estimated 13% of desertification in Mongolia is caused by natural factors; the rest is due to human influence particularly overgrazing and increased erosion of soils in cultivated areas. During the period 1940 to 2015, the mean air temperature increased by 2.24\u00a0\u00b0C. The warmest ten-year period was during the latest decade to 2021. Precipitation has decreased by 7% over this period resulting in increased arid conditions throughout Mongolia. The Gobi desert continues to expand northward, with over 70% of Mongolia's land degraded through overgrazing, deforestation, and climate change. In addition, the Mongolia government has listed forest fires, blights, unsustainable forestry and mining activities as leading causes of desertification in the country. The transition from sheep to goat farming in order to meet export demands for cashmere wool has caused degradation of grazing lands. Compared to sheep, goats do more damage to grazing lands by eating roots and flowers.\nTo mitigate the financial impact of desertification in Inner Mongolia, Bai Jingying teaches women how to do traditional embroidery, which they then sell to provide additional income.\nSouth America.\nSouth America is another area vulnerable by desertification, as 25% of the land is classified as drylands and over 68% of the land area has undergone soil erosion as a result of deforestation and overgrazing. 27 to 43% of the land areas in Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador and Peru are at risk due to desertification. In Argentina, Mexico and Paraguay, greater than half the land area is degraded by desertification and cannot be used for agriculture. In Central America, drought has caused increased unemployment and decreased food security - also causing migration of people. Similar impacts have been seen in rural parts of Mexico where about 1,000\u00a0km2 of land have been lost yearly due to desertification. In Argentina, desertification has the potential to disrupt the nation's food supply.\nReversing desertification.\nTechniques and countermeasures exist for mitigating or reversing desertification. For some of these measures, there are numerous barriers to their implementation. Yet for others, the solution simply requires the exercise of human reason.\nOne proposed barrier is that the costs of adopting sustainable agricultural practices sometimes exceed the benefits for individual farmers, even while they are socially and environmentally beneficial. Another issue is a lack of political will, and lack of funding to support land reclamation and anti-desertification programs.\nDesertification is recognized as a major threat to biodiversity. Some countries have developed biodiversity action plans to counter its effects, particularly in relation to the protection of endangered flora and fauna.\nImproving soil quality.\nTechniques focus on two aspects: provisioning of water, and fixation and hyper-fertilizing soil. Fixating the soil is often done through the use of shelter belts, woodlots and windbreaks. Windbreaks are made from trees and bushes and are used to reduce soil erosion and evapotranspiration.\nSome soils (for example, clay), due to lack of water can become consolidated rather than porous (as in the case of sandy soils). Some techniques as za\u00ef or tillage are then used to still allow the planting of crops.\nAnother technique that is useful is contour trenching. This involves the digging of 150\u00a0m long, 1\u00a0m deep trenches in the soil. The trenches are made parallel to the height lines of the landscape, preventing the water from flowing within the trenches and causing erosion. Stone walls are placed around the trenches to prevent the trenches from closing up again. This method was invented by Peter Westerveld.\nEnriching of the soil and restoration of its fertility is often achieved by plants. Of these, leguminous plants which extract nitrogen from the air and fix it in the soil, succulents (such as Opuntia), and food crops/trees as grains, barley, beans and dates are the most important. Sand fences can also be used to control drifting of soil and sand erosion.\nAnother way to restore soil fertility is through the use of nitrogen-rich fertilizer. Due to the higher cost of this fertilizer, many smallholder farmers are reluctant to use it, especially in areas where subsistence farming is common. Several nations, including India, Zambia, and Malawi have responded to this by implementing subsidies to help encourage adoption of this technique.\nSome research centres (such as Bel-Air Research Center IRD/ISRA/UCAD) are also experimenting with the inoculation of tree species with mycorrhiza in arid zones. The mycorrhiza are basically fungi attaching themselves to the roots of the plants. They hereby create a symbiotic relation with the trees, increasing the surface area of the tree's roots greatly (allowing the tree to gather much more nutrient from the soil).\nThe bioengineering of soil microbes, particularly photosynthesizers, has also been suggested and theoretically modeled as a method to protect drylands. The aim would be to enhance the existing cooperative loops between soil microbes and vegetation.\nDesert greening.\nAs there are many different types of deserts, there are also different types of desert reclamation methodologies. An example for this is the salt flats in the Rub' al Khali desert in Saudi Arabia. These salt flats are one of the most promising desert areas for seawater agriculture and could be revitalized without the use of freshwater or much energy.\nFarmer-managed natural regeneration (FMNR) is another technique that has produced successful results for desert reclamation. Since 1980, this method to reforest degraded landscape has been applied with some success in Niger. This simple and low-cost method has enabled farmers to regenerate some 30,000 square kilometers in Niger. The process involves enabling native sprouting tree growth through selective pruning of shrub shoots. The residue from pruned trees can be used to provide mulching for fields thus increasing soil water retention and reducing evaporation. Additionally, properly spaced and pruned trees can increase crop yields. The Humbo Assisted Regeneration Project which uses FMNR techniques in Ethiopia has received money from The World Bank's BioCarbon Fund, which supports projects that sequester or conserve carbon in forests or agricultural ecosystems.\nThe Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations launched the FAO Drylands Restoration Initiative in 2012 to draw together knowledge and experience on dryland restoration. In 2015, FAO published global guidelines for the restoration of degraded forests and landscapes in drylands, in collaboration with the Turkish Ministry of Forestry and Water Affairs and the Turkish Cooperation and Coordination Agency.\nThe \"Green Wall of China\" is a high-profile example of one method that has been finding success in this battle with desertification. This wall is a much larger-scale version of what American farmers did in the 1930s to stop the great Midwest dust bowl. This plan was proposed in the late 1970s, and has become a major ecological engineering project that is not predicted to end until the year 2055. According to Chinese reports, there have been nearly 66\u00a0billion trees planted in China's great green wall. The green wall of China has decreased desert land in China by an annual average of 1,980 square km. The frequency of sandstorms nationwide have fallen 20% due to the green wall. Due to the success that China has been finding in stopping the spread of desertification, plans are currently being made in Africa to start a \"wall\" along the borders of the Sahara desert as well to be financed by the United Nations Global Environment Facility trust.\nIn 2007 the African Union started the Great Green Wall of Africa project in order to combat desertification in 20 countries. The wall is 8,000\u00a0km wide, stretching across the entire width of the continent and has 8 billion dollars in support of the project. The project has restored 36millionhectares of land, and by 2030 the initiative plans to restore a total of 100\u00a0millionhectares. The Great Green Wall has created many job opportunities for the participating countries, with over 20,000 jobs created in Nigeria alone.\nBetter managed grazing.\nRestored grasslands store CO2 from the atmosphere as organic plant material. Grazing livestock, usually not left to wander, consume the grass and minimize its growth. A method proposed to restore grasslands uses fences with many small paddocks, moving herds from one paddock to another after a day or two in order to mimic natural grazers and allowing the grass to grow optimally. Proponents of managed grazing methods estimate that increasing this method could increase carbon content of the soils in the world's 3.5\u00a0billion hectares of agricultural grassland and offset nearly 12 years of CO2 emissions.\nHistory.\nThe world's most noted deserts have been formed by natural processes interacting over long intervals of time. During most of these times, deserts have grown and shrunk independently of human activities. Paleodeserts are large sand seas now inactive because they are stabilized by vegetation, some extending beyond the present margins of core deserts, such as the Sahara, the largest hot desert.\nHistorical evidence shows that the serious and extensive land deterioration occurring several centuries ago in arid regions had three centers: the Mediterranean, the Mesopotamian Valley, and the Loess Plateau of China, where population was dense.\nThe earliest known discussion of the topic arose soon after the French colonization of West Africa, when the Comit\u00e9 d'Etudes commissioned a study on \"dess\u00e9chement progressif\" to explore the prehistoric expansion of the Sahara Desert. The modern study of desertification emerged from the study of the 1980s drought in the Sahel."}
{"id": "8105", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8105", "title": "Data compression/Huffman coding", "text": ""}
{"id": "8108", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8108", "title": "Data compression/MP3", "text": ""}
{"id": "8110", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8110", "title": "Data compression/lossless", "text": ""}
{"id": "8113", "revid": "545027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8113", "title": "Multimedia compression", "text": ""}
{"id": "8117", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8117", "title": "Dumbarton Bridge (California)", "text": "The Dumbarton Bridge is the southernmost of the highway bridges across San Francisco Bay in California. Carrying over 70,000 vehicles and about 118 pedestrian and bicycle crossings daily (384 on weekends), it is the shortest bridge across San Francisco Bay at . Its eastern end is in Fremont, near Newark in the San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge, and its western end is in Menlo Park. Bridging State Route 84 across the bay, it has three lanes each way and a separated bike/pedestrian lane along its south side. Like the San Mateo\u2013Hayward Bridge to the north, power lines parallel the bridge.\nHistory and engineering features.\nThe bridge has never been officially named, but its commonly used name comes from Dumbarton Point near the east end of the bridge, named in 1876 after Dumbarton, Scotland. Built originally to provide a shortcut for traffic originating in San Mateo and Santa Clara counties, the bridge served industrial and residential areas on both sides. The earlier bridge opened on January 17, 1927, and was the first vehicular bridge to cross San Francisco Bay. A portion of this old drawbridge remains as a fishing pier on the east side of the Bay. The original bridge was built with private capital and then purchased by the state for $2.5 million in 1951 (equivalent to $\u00a0million in ).\nIts age, and the two-lane undivided roadway and lift-span, led to a replacement bridge being built to the north. This bridge opened in October 1982 as a four-lane, high-level structure. The structure was re-striped to accommodate six lanes on October 18, 1989, in response to the temporary closing of the San Francisco\u2013Oakland Bay Bridge due to the Loma Prieta earthquake, and the permanent widening of the approaches was completed by July 2003. The cost of the complete replacement project was $200 million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in ). The current bridge includes a two-way bicycle and separate pedestrian path on the south-facing side. A center span provides of vertical clearance for shipping. The approach spans on both sides of the Bay are of pre-stressed lightweight concrete girders supporting a lightweight concrete deck. The center spans are twin steel trapezoidal girders which also support a lightweight concrete deck.\nThe center span of the original bridge was demolished in a controlled explosion in September 1984.\nRoadway connections.\nThe bridge is part of State Route 84, and is directly connected to Interstate 880 by a freeway segment north of the Fremont end.\nThere is no freeway connection between U.S. 101 and the southwest end of the Dumbarton Bridge. Motorists must traverse one of three at-grade routes to connect from the Bayshore Freeway to the bridge. These are (from northwest to southeast):\nThe Willow Road and University Avenue junctions with Bayfront Expressway are at-grade intersections controlled by traffic lights; there are two additional controlled intersections at Chilco Road and Marsh Road, and the Marsh Road interchange on U.S. 101 is a parclo. The result is that Bayfront Expressway is frequently congested, and when not congested is often the site of high-speed car crashes. In 2007, author David Halberstam was killed in one such crash at the Willow Road intersection.\nAccess to I-280 is available via State Route 84 to Woodside Road (as signed) or other arterial routes. There are no cross-Peninsula freeway connections between State Routes 92 and 84. In addition, there are no direct cross-Peninsula arterial routes between State Route 84 and Page Mill Road, a five-mile gap.\nAlthough the present situation has resulted in severe traffic problems on the bridge itself and in Menlo Park and East Palo Alto, Caltrans has been unable to upgrade the relevant portion of Highway 84 to freeway standards for several decades, due to opposition from the cities of Menlo Park, Atherton and Palo Alto. Freeway opponents fear that upgrading Highway 84 will encourage more people to live in southern Alameda County (where housing is more affordable) and commute to jobs in the mid-Peninsula area (where businesses wish to be located in order to be close to Silicon Valley), thus increasing traffic in their neighborhoods to the south and west of U.S. 101 and even along State Routes 85 and 237.\nBus service across the bridge is provided by the Dumbarton Express, run by a consortium of local transit agencies (SamTrans, AC Transit, VTA and others) which connects to BART at Union City and Caltrain at Palo Alto and California Avenue. AC Transit also runs Transbay buses U (Fremont BART and Amtrak to Stanford) and DA (Ardenwood to Oracle and Facebook headquarters) across the bridge. The free Stanford Marguerite Shuttle also runs buses AE-F and EB across the bridge.\nEnvironmental factors.\nWhen the current bridge was planned in the 1970s, Caltrans conducted extensive environmental research on the aquatic and terrestrial environment. Principal concerns of the public were air pollution and noise pollution impacts, particularly in some residential areas of Menlo Park and East Palo Alto. Studies were conducted to produce contour maps of projected sound levels and carbon monoxide concentrations throughout the western approaches, for each alternative connection scheme.\nThe area around the bridge is an important ecological area, hosting many species of birds, fish and mammals. The endangered species California clapper rail is known to be present in the western bridge terminus area.\nNear the bridge on the Peninsula are Menlo Park's Bayfront Park, East Palo Alto's Ravenswood Open Space Preserve, and the Palo Alto Baylands Nature Preserve. An accessible portion of the San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge lies immediately north of the western bridge terminus, where the Ravenswood trail runs.\nOn both sides of the east end of the bridge are large salt ponds and levee trails belonging to the Don Edwards San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge. The headquarters and visitor center for the refuge is on a hill south of the bridge approach. North of the east end of the bridge is Coyote Hills Regional Park, with its network of trails running over tall hills. North of that is the Alameda Creek Regional Trail from the Bay to Niles Canyon. East of Coyote Hills is Ardenwood Historic Farm, a restored working farm that preserves and displays turn-of-the-century farming methods\nTolls.\nTolls are only collected from westbound traffic headed to Menlo Park at the toll plaza on the Fremont side of the bay. All-electronic tolling has been in effect since 2020, and drivers may either pay using the FasTrak electronic toll collection device or using the license plate tolling program. It remains not truly an open road tolling system until the remaining unused toll booths are removed, forcing drivers to slow substantially from freeway speeds while passing through. Effective , the toll rate for passenger cars is $8. During peak traffic hours on weekdays between 5:00\u00a0am and 10:00\u00a0am, and between 3:00\u00a0pm and 7:00\u00a0pm, carpool vehicles carrying three or more people, clean air vehicles, or motorcycles may pay a discounted toll of $4 if they have FasTrak and use the designated carpool lane. Carpools with two people may also receive the discount until 2026. Drivers without Fastrak or a license plate account must open and pay via a \"short term\" account within 48 hours after crossing the bridge or they will be sent an invoice of the unpaid toll. No additional toll violation penalty will be assessed if the invoice is paid within 21 days.\nHistorical toll rates.\nPrior to 1969, tolls on the Dumbarton Bridge were collected in both directions. When it opened, the original 1927 span had a toll of $0.40 per car () plus $0.05 per passenger (). In 1959, tolls were set to $0.35 per car (). It was raised to $0.70 in 1969 (), then $0.75 in 1976 (). The toll per car remained at $0.75 when the replacement bridge opened in 1982 ().\nThe basic toll (for automobiles) on the seven state-owned bridges, including the Dumbarton Bridge, was standardized to $1 by Regional Measure 1, approved by Bay Area voters in 1988 (). A $1 seismic retrofit surcharge was added in 1998 by the state legislature, increasing the toll to $2 (), originally for eight years, but since then extended to December 2037 (AB1171, October 2001). On March 2, 2004, voters approved Regional Measure 2 to fund various transportation improvement projects, raising the toll by another dollar to $3 (). An additional dollar was added to the toll starting January 1, 2007, to cover cost overruns on the eastern span replacement of the Bay Bridge, increasing the toll to $4 ().\nThe Metropolitan Transportation Commission, a regional transportation agency, in its capacity as the Bay Area Toll Authority, administers RM1 and RM2 funds, a significant portion of which are allocated to public transit capital improvements and operating subsidies in the transportation corridors served by the bridges. Caltrans administers the \"second dollar\" seismic surcharge, and receives some of the MTC-administered funds to perform other maintenance work on the bridges. The Bay Area Toll Authority is made up of appointed officials put in place by various city and county governments, and is not subject to direct voter oversight.\nDue to further funding shortages for seismic retrofit projects, the Bay Area Toll Authority again raised tolls on all seven of the state-owned bridges in July 2010. The toll rate for autos on the Dumbarton Bridge was thus increased to $5 ().\nIn June 2018, Bay Area voters approved Regional Measure 3 to further raise the tolls on all seven of the state-owned bridges to fund $4.5 billion worth of transportation improvements in the area. Under the passed measure, the toll rate for autos on the Dumbarton Bridge was increased to $6 on January 1, 2019; to $7 on January 1, 2022; and then to $8 on January 1, 2025.\nIn September 2019, the MTC approved a $4 million plan to eliminate toll takers and convert all seven of the state-owned bridges to all-electronic tolling, citing that 80 percent of drivers are now using Fastrak and the change would improve traffic flow. On March 20, 2020, accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic, all-electronic tolling was placed in effect for all seven state-owned toll bridges. The MTC then installed new systems at all seven bridges to make them permanently cashless by the start of 2021. In April 2022, the Bay Area Toll Authority announced plans to remove all remaining unused toll booths and create an open-road tolling system which functions at highway speeds.\nThe Bay Area Toll Authority then approved a plan in December 2024 to implement 50-cent annual toll increases on all seven state-owned bridges between 2026 and 2030 to help pay for bridge maintenance. The standard toll rate for autos will thus rise to $8.50 on January 1, 2026; $9 in 2027; $9.50 in 2028; $10 in 2029; and then to $10.50 in 2030. And becoming effective in 2027, a 25-cent surcharge will be added to any toll charged to a license plate account, and a 50-cent surcharge added to a toll violation invoice, due to the added cost of processing these payment methods. The carpool lane rules will also be standardized across the toll bridges in 2026, with a minimum of three people required to qualify for the discount.\nDumbarton Rail Bridge.\nJust to the south of the car bridge lies the Dumbarton Rail Bridge. Built in 1910, the rail bridge has been unused since 1982 and its western approach collapsed in a fire in 1998. When the bridge was in use, boaters would signal the operator, who would start a diesel engine and rotate the bridge to the open position on a large gear. The bridge is now left in the open position as shown. There are plans for a new rail bridge and rehabilitation of the rail line to serve a commuter rail service to connect Union City, Fremont, and Newark to various Peninsula destinations. A successful March 2004 regional transportation ballot measure included funding to rehabilitate the rail bridge for the commuter rail service, but in October 2008 the Metropolitan Transportation Commission transferred $91 million from this project to the BART Warm Springs extension in Fremont.\nHetch Hetchy Aqueduct.\nBetween the Dumbarton Bridge and the Dumbarton Rail Bridge is the Bay crossing of the Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct. The aqueduct rises above ground in Newark at the east side of the Bay, falls below the water's surface at a pump station in Fremont, re-emerges in the middle of the Bay and then continues above water until it reaches the west side of the Bay at Menlo Park.\nIn popular culture.\nA scene of the 1971 movie \"Harold and Maude\" was filmed at the original toll plaza and showed Maude speeding and disobeying a police officer."}
{"id": "8118", "revid": "11049176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8118", "title": "Dock (disambiguation)", "text": "A dock is infrastructure used for berthing watercraft.\nDock or DOCK may also refer to:"}
{"id": "8119", "revid": "22105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8119", "title": "Dockyard", "text": ""}
{"id": "8121", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8121", "title": "Dallas Cowboys", "text": "The Dallas Cowboys are a professional American football team based in the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex. The Cowboys compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the National Football Conference (NFC) East division. The team is headquartered in Frisco, Texas, and has played its home games at AT&amp;T Stadium in Arlington, Texas, since its opening in 2009. The stadium took its current name prior to the 2013 season, following the team's decision to sell the stadium's naming rights to telecommunications company AT&amp;T.\nThe Cowboys joined the NFL as an expansion team in . The team's national following might best be represented by its NFL record of consecutive sell-outs. The Cowboys' streak of 190 consecutive sold-out regular and post-season games (home and away) began in 2002. The franchise has made it to the Super Bowl eight times, tying it with the Pittsburgh Steelers, Denver Broncos, and San Francisco 49ers for second-most Super Bowl appearances in history behind the New England Patriots' record 11 appearances. Their eight NFC championships are tied for most in the conference's history. The Cowboys are the only NFL team to record 20 straight winning seasons (from 1966 to 1985) during which they missed the playoffs only twice (1974 and 1984).\nIn 2015, the Dallas Cowboys became the first sports team to be valued at $4 billion, making it the most valuable sports team in the world, according to \"Forbes\". The Cowboys also generated $620 million in revenue in 2014, a record for a U.S. sports team. In 2018, they also became the first NFL franchise to be valued at $5 billion and making Forbes' list as the most valued NFL team for the 12th straight year.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nPrior to the formation of the Dallas Cowboys, there had not been an NFL team south of Washington, D.C. since the Dallas Texans folded in 1952 after only one season. Two businessmen had tried and failed to get Dallas a team in the NFL: Lamar Hunt responded by forming the American Football League with a group of owners, which would spur the NFL to expand beyond twelve teams. Oilman Clint Murchison Jr. persisted with his intent to bring a team to Dallas, but George Preston Marshall, owner of the Washington Redskins, had a monopoly in the South (after the addition of Dallas, the South would see three further teams - NFL teams in Atlanta and New Orleans, and an AFL team in Miami - added in the next six years).\nMurchison had tried to purchase the Washington Redskins (now Commanders) from Marshall in 1958 with the intent of moving them to Dallas. An agreement was struck, but as the deal was about to be finalized, Marshall called for a change in terms, which infuriated Murchison, and he called off the deal. Marshall then opposed any franchise for Murchison in Dallas. Since NFL expansion needed unanimous approval from team owners at that time, Marshall's position would prevent Murchison from joining the league.\nMarshall had a falling out with the Redskins band leader Barnee Breeskin, who had written the music to the Redskins fight song \"Hail to the Redskins\", and Marshall's wife had penned the lyrics. Breeskin owned the rights to the song and was aware of Murchison's plight to get an NFL franchise. Angry with Marshall, Breeskin approached Murchison's attorney to sell him the rights to the song before the expansion vote in 1959: Murchison subsequently purchased \"Hail to the Redskins\" for $2,500.\nBefore the vote to award franchises in 1959, Murchison revealed to Marshall that he now owned the song, and barred Marshall from playing it during games. After Marshall launched an expletive-laced tirade, Murchison sold the rights to \"Hail to the Redskins\" back to Marshall in exchange for his vote, the lone one against Murchison getting a franchise at that time, and a rivalry was born. Murchison hired CBS Sports executive and former Los Angeles Rams general manager Tex Schramm as team president and general manager, San Francisco 49ers scout Gil Brandt as head of player personnel, and New York Giants defensive coordinator Tom Landry as head coach, thus forming a triumvirate that would lead the Cowboys' football operations for three decades.\nTom Landry years (1960\u20131988).\nLike most expansion teams, the Cowboys struggled at first. They failed to win a game in their inaugural season. However, Landry slowly brought the team to respectability. In 1965, they finally got to .500. They broke all the way through a year later, winning consecutive Eastern Conference titles in 1966 and 1967. However, they lost the NFL Championship Game each time to the Green Bay Packers with the second loss coming in the 1967 Ice Bowl. They would win consecutive division titles in 1968 and 1969 when the NFL adopted a divisional format, but were defeated in the playoffs both years by the Cleveland Browns.\nFrom 1970 through 1979, the Cowboys won 105 regular season games, more than any other NFL franchise during that time span. In addition, they appeared in five Super Bowls, winning two (1971 and 1977).\nLed by quarterback Craig Morton, the Cowboys had a 10\u20134 season in 1970. They defeated Detroit 5\u20130 in the lowest-scoring playoff game in NFL history and then defeated San Francisco 17\u201310 in the first-ever NFC Championship Game to qualify for their first Super Bowl appearance in franchise history, a mistake-filled Super Bowl V, where they lost 16\u201313 to the Baltimore Colts courtesy of a field goal by Colts' kicker Jim O'Brien with five seconds remaining in the contest. Despite the loss, linebacker Chuck Howley was named the Super Bowl MVP, the first and only time in Super Bowl history that the game's MVP did not come from the winning team.\nSuper Bowl VI champions (1971).\nThe Cowboys moved from the Cotton Bowl to Texas Stadium in week six of the 1971 season. Landry named Staubach as the permanent starting quarterback to start the second half of the season, and Dallas was off and running. The Cowboys won their last seven regular season games (finishing 11\u20133) before dispatching the Minnesota Vikings and San Francisco 49ers in the playoffs to return to the Super Bowl. In Super Bowl VI, behind an MVP performance from Staubach and a then Super Bowl record 252\u00a0yards rushing, the Cowboys crushed the upstart Miami Dolphins, 24\u20133, to finally bury the \"Next Year's Champions\" stigma.\nAfter missing the playoffs in 1974, the team drafted well the following year, adding defensive lineman Randy White (a future Hall of Fame member) and linebacker Thomas \"Hollywood\" Henderson. The fresh influx of talent helped the Cowboys back to the playoffs in 1975 as a wild card, losing to the Pittsburgh Steelers, 21\u201317, in Super Bowl X.\nSuper Bowl XII champions (1977).\nDallas began the 1977 season 8\u20130, finishing 12\u20132. In the postseason, the Cowboys routed the Chicago Bears 37\u20137 and Minnesota Vikings 23\u20136 before defeating the Denver Broncos 27\u201310 in Super Bowl XII in New Orleans. As a testament to Doomsday's dominance in the hard-hitting game, defensive linemen Randy White and Harvey Martin were named co-Super Bowl MVPs, the first and only time multiple players have received the award. Dallas returned to the Super Bowl, following the 1978 season, losing to Pittsburgh 35\u201331. Bob Ryan, an NFL Films editor, dubbed the Cowboys \"America's Team\" following the Super Bowl loss, a nickname that has earned derision from non-Cowboys fans but has stuck through both good times and bad. Danny White became the Cowboys' starting quarterback in 1980 after quarterback Roger Staubach retired. Despite going 12\u20134 in 1980, the Cowboys came into the playoffs as a Wild Card team. In the opening round of the 1980\u201381 NFL playoffs they avenged their elimination from the prior year's playoffs by defeating the Rams. In the Divisional Round they squeaked by the Atlanta Falcons 30\u201327. For the NFC Championship they were pitted against division rival Philadelphia Eagles, the team that won the division during the regular season. The Eagles captured their first conference championship and Super Bowl berth by winning 20\u20137.\n1981 brought another division championship for the Cowboys. They entered the 1981\u201382 NFL playoffs as the number 2 seed. Their first postseason saw them blow out Tampa Bay in a 38\u20130 shutout. The Cowboys then advanced to the NFC Championship Game against the San Francisco 49ers, the number 1 seed. Despite having a late 4th quarter 27\u201321 lead, they would lose to the 49ers 28\u201327. 49ers quarterback Joe Montana led his team on an 89-yard game-winning touchdown drive, connecting with Dwight Clark in a play known as The Catch.\nThe 1982 season was shortened after a player strike. With a 6\u20133 record Dallas made it to the playoffs for the 8th consecutive season. As the number 2 seed for the 1982\u201383 NFL playoffs they eliminated the Buccaneers 30\u201317 in the Wild Card round and dispatched the Packers 37\u201326 in the Divisional round to advance to their 3rd consecutive Conference championship game. However, the third time was not the charm for the Cowboys as they fell 31\u201317 to their division rival and eventual Super Bowl XVII champions, the Washington Redskins.\nAlthough it was not apparent at the time, the loss in the 1982 NFC title game marked the end of an era. For the 1983 season the Cowboys went 12\u20134 and made it once again to the playoffs but were upset at home in the Wild Card by the Rams 24\u201317. However, 1983 was a missed opportunity as prior to their playoff defeat, the Cowboys had a chance to clinch the NFC East and home-field advantage throughout the playoffs against Washington in the penultimate week of the regular season, but were defeated soundly 31\u201310 at home, and conceded control of the division to the Redskins in which they would not relinquish a week later. Prior to the 1984 season, Murchison sold the Cowboys to another Texas oil magnate, H.R. \"Bum\" Bright and his ten partners. Dallas posted a 9\u20137 record that season but missed the playoffs for the first time in 10 seasons and only the second time in 18 years. After going 10\u20136 in 1985 and winning a division title, the Cowboys were shut out 20\u20130 by the Rams in the Divisional round in Los Angeles.\nHard times came for the organization as they went 7\u20139 in 1986, 7\u20138 in 1987, and 3\u201313 in 1988. During this time period, Bright became disenchanted with the team. During an embarrassing home loss to Atlanta in 1987, Bright told the media that he was \"horrified\" at Landry's play calling. During the savings and loan crisis, Bright's savings and loan was taken over by the FSLIC. With most of the rest of his money tied up in the Cowboys, Bright was forced to sell the team to Jerry Jones on February 25, 1989, for $150 million.\nJerry Jones era (1989\u2013present).\nJimmy Johnson years (1989\u20131993).\nJones immediately fired Tom Landry, the only head coach in franchise history, replacing him with University of Miami head coach Jimmy Johnson, who was also Jones' teammate at the University of Arkansas as a fellow defensive lineman. The hiring of Johnson also reunited Johnson with second-year wide receiver Michael Irvin, who had played collegiately at Miami. With the first pick in the draft, the Cowboys selected UCLA quarterback Troy Aikman. Later that same year, they would trade veteran running back Herschel Walker to the Minnesota Vikings for five veteran players and eight draft choices. Although the Cowboys finished the 1989 season with a 1\u201315 record, their worst in almost 30 years, \"The Trade\" later allowed Dallas to draft a number of impact players to rebuild the team.\nJohnson quickly returned the Cowboys to the NFL's elite. Skillful drafts added fullback Daryl Johnston and center Mark Stepnoski in 1989, running back Emmitt Smith in 1990, defensive tackle Russell Maryland and offensive tackle Erik Williams in 1991, and safety Darren Woodson in 1992. The young talent joined holdovers from the Landry era such as wide receiver Michael Irvin, guard Nate Newton, linebacker Ken Norton Jr., and offensive lineman Mark Tuinei, defensive lineman Jim Jeffcoat, and veteran pickups such as tight end Jay Novacek and defensive end Charles Haley.\nThings started to look up for the franchise in 1990. On Week 1 Dallas won their first home game since September 1988 when they defeated the San Diego Chargers 17\u201314. They went 2\u20137 in their next 9 games but won 4 of their last 6 games to finish the season with a 4th place 7\u20139 record.\nComing into 1991 the Cowboys replaced offensive coordinator Dave Shula with Norv Turner; the Cowboys raced to a 6\u20135 start, then defeated the previously unbeaten Redskins despite injury to Troy Aikman. Backup Steve Beuerlein took over and the Cowboys finished 11\u20135. In the Wild Card round they defeated the Bears 17\u201313 for the Cowboys' first playoff win since 1982. In the Divisional round their season ended in a 38\u20136 playoff rout by the Lions.\nSuper Bowl XXVII champions (1992).\nIn 1992 Dallas set a team record for regular-season wins with a 13\u20133 mark. They started off the season by defeating the defending Super Bowl champion Redskins 23\u201310. Going into the playoffs as the number 2 seed they had a first-round bye before facing division rival the Philadelphia Eagles. The Cowboys won that game 34\u201310 to advance to the NFC Conference Championship game for the first time in 10 years. They were pitted against the San Francisco 49ers, the top seed. On January 17, 1993, the Cowboys went to Candlestick Park and defeated the 49ers 30\u201320 to clinch their first Super Bowl berth since 1978. Dallas defeated the Buffalo Bills 52\u201317 in Super Bowl XXVII, during which they forced a record nine turnovers. Johnson became the first coach to claim a national championship in college football and a Super Bowl victory in professional football.\nSuper Bowl XXVIII champions (1993).\nDespite starting the 1993 season 0\u20132, Dallas finished the regular season 12\u20134 as the number 1 seed of the NFC. Dallas sent a then-NFL record 11 players to the Pro Bowl in 1993: Aikman, safety Thomas Everett, Irvin, Johnston, Maryland, Newton, Norton, Novacek, Smith, Stepnoski, and Williams. They defeated the Green Bay Packers 27\u201317 in the divisional round. In the NFC Conference Championship, Dallas beat the 49ers in Dallas, 38\u201321. The Cowboys again defeated the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXVIII, 30\u201313 (becoming the first team in NFL history to win a Super Bowl after starting 0\u20132).\nBarry Switzer years (1994\u20131997).\nOnly weeks after Super Bowl XXVIII, however, friction between Johnson and Jones culminated in Johnson stunning the football world by announcing his resignation. Jones then hired former University of Oklahoma head coach Barry Switzer to replace Johnson. The Cowboys finished 12\u20134 in 1994. They once again clinched a first-round bye and defeated Green Bay 35\u20139 in the Divisional Round. They missed the Super Bowl, however, after losing to the San Francisco 49ers in the NFC Championship Game, 38\u201328.\nSuper Bowl XXX champions (1995).\nPrior to the start of 1995 season Jerry Jones lured All-Pro cornerback Deion Sanders away from San Francisco. Dallas started the season 4\u20130 including shutting out their division rival New York Giants 35\u20130 at Giants Stadium to open their season. Emmitt Smith set an NFL record with 25 rushing touchdowns that season. They ended the season 12\u20134 and went into the playoffs as the number 1 seed. In the Divisional round, they dispatched their division rival Eagles 30\u201311 to advance to their fourth consecutive NFC Conference Championship Game, in which they defeated Green Bay, 38\u201327. In Super Bowl XXX the Cowboys defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers 27\u201317 at Sun Devil Stadium for their fifth Super Bowl championship, tied with the San Francisco 49ers for the most by any NFC team. Switzer joined Johnson as the only coaches to win a college football national championship and a Super Bowl.\nThe glory days of the Cowboys were again beginning to dim as free agency, age, and injuries began taking their toll. Star receiver Michael Irvin was suspended by the league for the first five games of 1996 following a drug-related arrest; he came back after the Cowboys started the season 2\u20133. They finished the regular season with a 10\u20136 record, won the NFC East title, and entered the playoffs as the number 3 seed in the NFC. They defeated Minnesota 40\u201315 in the Wild Card round but were eliminated in the Divisional Round of the playoffs 26\u201317 by the Carolina Panthers.\nThe Cowboys went 6\u201310 in 1997, losing the last six consecutive games of the season, with discipline and off-field problems becoming major distractions. As a result, Switzer resigned as head coach in January 1998 and former Steelers offensive coordinator Chan Gailey was hired to take his place.\nGailey and Campo years (1998\u20132002).\nGailey led the team to two playoff appearances with a 10\u20136 record in 1998 and an NFC East championship, the Cowboys' sixth in seven years, but the Cowboys were upset at home in the Wild Card Round of the playoffs by the Arizona Cardinals 20\u20137.\nIn 1999 Dallas went 8\u20138 in a season that featured Irvin suffering a career-ending cervical spine injury in a loss to the Philadelphia Eagles at Veterans Stadium. The season ended in a 27-10 Wild Card playoff loss to the Minnesota Vikings. Gailey was fired and became the first Cowboys coach who did not take the team to a Super Bowl.\nDefensive coordinator Dave Campo was promoted to head coach for the 2000 season. Prior to the season starting cornerback Deion Sanders was released after 5 seasons with the team. He later signed with the division rival Washington Redskins. In Week 1, they were blown out 41\u201314 by the Philadelphia Eagles. That game was very costly when veteran quarterback Troy Aikman suffered a serious concussion which ultimately ended his career. Longtime NFL quarterback Randall Cunningham filled in for Aikman for the rest of the season at quarterback. The Cowboys finished the season in 4th place with a 5\u201311 record. The only highlights of 2000 were Emmitt Smith having his 10th consecutive 1,000-yard rushing season and a season sweep over the Redskins.\n2001 was another hard year in Dallas. Prior to the season starting Aikman was released from the team and he retired due to the concussions he had received. Jerry Jones signed Tony Banks as a quarterback. Banks had been a starter for half of the season the previous year for the Super Bowl XXXV champion Baltimore Ravens before being benched. Jones also drafted quarterback Quincy Carter in the second round of that year's draft, and Banks was released during the preseason. Ryan Leaf, Anthony Wright, and Clint Stoerner all competed for the quarterback position that season. Dallas again finished at 5\u201311, last place in the NFC East, but they swept the Washington Redskins for the 4th consecutive season.\nPrior to the 2002 season Dallas drafted safety Roy Williams with the 8th overall pick. The season started out low as the Cowboys lost to the expansion Houston Texans 19\u201310 in Week 1. By far the highlight of 2002 was on October 28, when during a home game against the Seattle Seahawks, Emmitt Smith broke the all-time NFL rushing record previously held by Walter Payton. Their Thanksgiving Day win over the Washington Redskins was their 10th consecutive win against the Redskins. However, that was their final 2002 win as the team lost their next four games to finish with another last-place 5\u201311 record. The losing streak was punctuated with a Week 17 20\u201314 loss against the Redskins. That game was Smith's last game as a Cowboys player; he was released during the offseason. Campo was immediately fired as head coach at the conclusion of the season.\nBill Parcells years (2003\u20132006).\nJones then lured Bill Parcells out of retirement to coach the Cowboys. The Cowboys became the surprise team of the 2003 season getting off to a hot 7\u20132 start, but went 3\u20134 for the rest of the season. They were able to grab the second NFC wild-card spot with a 10\u20136 record but lost in the Wild Card round to eventual conference champion Carolina Panthers, 29\u201310.\nIn 2004 Dallas was unable to replicate their 2003 success and ended 6\u201310. Quincy Carter was released during the preseason and was replaced at quarterback by Vinny Testaverde.\nDallas got off to a great 7\u20133 start for the 2005 season but ended up only in 3rd place with a 9\u20137 record. Prior to the beginning of that season, they signed veteran Drew Bledsoe as starting quarterback.\n2006 was an interesting year for the Cowboys. Prior to the season, they signed free agent wide receiver Terrell Owens who was talented yet controversial. The Cowboys started the season 3\u20132. During a week 7 matchup against the New York Giants, Bledsoe, who had been struggling since the start of the season, was pulled from the game and was replaced by backup Tony Romo. Romo was unable to salvage that game and Dallas lost 36\u201322. However, Romo was named the starter for the team and went 5\u20131 in his first 6 games. Dallas ended the season with a 9\u20137 2nd-place finish. They were able to clinch the number 5 playoff seed. They traveled to play the Seattle Seahawks where the Seahawks won 21\u201320. After the season Parcells retired and was replaced by Wade Phillips.\nWade Phillips years (2007\u20132010).\nDallas started the 2007 season with a bang, winning their first five games. They won 12 of their first 13 games, with their only loss during that span being to the New England Patriots, who went undefeated that season. Despite dropping two of their last three regular-season games, the Cowboys clinched their first number 1 NFC seed in 12 years, which also granted them a first-round bye and home-field advantage throughout the playoffs. They lost in the divisional round 21\u201317 to the eventual Super Bowl champion New York Giants.\nIn the tumultuous 2008 season, the Cowboys started off strong, going 3\u20130 for the second straight year, en route to a 4\u20131 start. However, things soon went downhill from there, after quarterback Tony Romo suffered a broken pinkie in an overtime loss to the Arizona Cardinals. With Brad Johnson and Brooks Bollinger playing as backups, Dallas went 1\u20132 during a three-game stretch. Romo's return showed promise, as Dallas went 3\u20130. However, injuries mounted during the season, with the team losing several starters for the year, such as Kyle Kosier, Felix Jones, safety Roy Williams, punter Mat McBriar, and several other starters playing with injuries. Entering December, the 8\u20134 Cowboys underperformed, finishing 1\u20133. They failed to make the playoffs after losing to the Philadelphia Eagles in the final regular-season game which saw the Eagles reach the playoffs instead.\nOn May 2, 2009, the Dallas Cowboys' practice facility collapsed during a wind storm. The collapse left twelve Cowboys players and coaches injured. The most serious injuries were special teams coach Joe DeCamillis, who suffered fractured cervical vertebrae and had surgery to stabilize fractured vertebrae in his neck, and Rich Behm, the team's 33-year-old scouting assistant, who was permanently paralyzed from the waist down after his spine was severed.\nThe 2009 season started positively with a road win against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, but fortunes quickly changed as Dallas fell to a 2\u20132 start. In week five, with starting wide receiver Roy Williams sidelined by injury, receiver Miles Austin got his first start of the season and had a record-setting day (250 yards receiving and 2 touchdowns) to help lead Dallas to an overtime win over the Kansas City Chiefs. Following their bye week, they went on a three-game winning streak including wins over the Atlanta Falcons and NFC East division rival Philadelphia Eagles. Despite entering December with a record of 8\u20133, they lost their slim grip on 1st place in the division with losses to the New York Giants and San Diego Chargers. Talks of past December collapses resurfaced, and another collapse in 2009 seemed validated. However, the team surged in the final three weeks of the season with a 24\u201317 victory against the eventual Super Bowl XLIV champion New Orleans Saints at the Louisiana Superdome, ending the Saints' previously unbeaten season in week 15. For the first time in franchise history, they posted back-to-back shutouts when they beat their division rivals, the Washington Redskins (17\u20130) and Philadelphia Eagles (24\u20130) to end the season. In the process, the Cowboys clinched their second NFC East title in three years as well as the third seed in the NFC Playoffs. Six days later, in the wild-card round of the playoffs, Dallas played the Eagles in a rematch of week 17. The Cowboys defeated the Eagles for the first Cowboys post-season win since the 1996 season, ending a streak of six consecutive NFL post-season losses. However, their playoff run ended after being routed 34\u20133 in the Divisional Round against the Minnesota Vikings.\nAfter beginning the 2010 season at 1\u20137, Phillips was fired as head coach and was replaced by offensive coordinator Jason Garrett as the interim head coach.\nJason Garrett years (2010\u20132019).\nWith Garrett as interim head coach, the Cowboys finished the 2010 season 6\u201310 after beginning at 1\u20137. With this improvement, the Cowboys signed Garrett as the head coach for the 2011 season.\nTo start the 2011 season the Cowboys played the New York Jets on a Sunday night primetime game in New York, on September 11. The Cowboys held the lead through most of the game, until a fumble, blocked punt, and interception led to the Jets coming back to win the game. In week 2 the Cowboys traveled to San Francisco to play the San Francisco 49ers. In the middle of the 2nd quarter, while the Cowboys trailed 10\u20137, Tony Romo suffered a rib injury and was replaced by Jon Kitna. Kitna threw 1 touchdown and 2 interceptions until Romo returned in the 3rd quarter as Dallas trailed 17\u20137. Romo then threw 3 touchdown passes to Miles Austin as the Cowboys rallied to send the game into overtime. On their opening possession after a 49ers punt, Romo found wide receiver Jesse Holley on a 78-yard pass, which set up the game-winning field goal by rookie kicker Dan Bailey. The Cowboys ended the season 8\u20138. They were in a position to win the NFC East but lost to the New York Giants in a Week 17 primetime Sunday Night game on NBC which allowed the Giants to win the division. The Giants would go on to win Super Bowl XLVI.\nThe Cowboys started off the 2012 season on a high note by defeating the defending Super Bowl champion New York Giants 24\u201317 on the opening night of the season. They would hover around the .500 mark for the majority of the season. They lost a close Week 6 game to eventual Super Bowl XLVII champion Baltimore Ravens 31\u201329 at M&amp;T Bank Stadium in Baltimore. Going into Week 17 they found themselves once again one win away from winning the division. Standing in their way were the Washington Redskins, who had beaten them on Thanksgiving at AT&amp;T Stadium and who were one win away from their first division title since 1999. Led by Robert Griffin III the Redskins defeated the Cowboys at home 28\u201318. Dallas once again finished the season 8\u20138.\nIn the 2013 season the Cowboys started off by defeating the New York Giants for the second straight year; this time 36\u201331. It was the first time since 2008 that the Cowboys were able to defeat the Giants at home. The win was punctuated by Brandon Carr intercepting an Eli Manning pass for a touchdown late in the 4th quarter. For the third straight year, Dallas once again found itself stuck in the .500 area. In Week 5, they lost a shootout to the eventual AFC champion Denver Broncos 51\u201348. They battled it out with the Philadelphia Eagles for control of the division throughout the season. In December however they lost 2 crucial back-to-back games to the Chicago Bears and Green Bay Packers. They were very successful in division games having a 5\u20130 division record heading into another Week 17 showdown for the NFC East crown against the Eagles. That included beating the Washington Redskins 24\u201323 on Week 16 thanks to the late-game heroics of Tony Romo. However, Romo received a severe back injury in that game which prematurely ended his season. The Cowboys called upon backup quarterback Kyle Orton to lead them into battle on the final week of the season. Orton was unsuccessful who threw a game-ending interception to the Eagles which allowed the Eagles to win 24\u201322. Dallas ended the year at 8\u20138 for the third year in a row. The two differences from this 8\u20138 ending compared to the others was that Dallas ended the season in second place compared to the 2 previous 3rd-place finishes, along with their season-ending defeat taking place at home instead of on the road.\nTo start off the 2014 season Dallas began by losing to the San Francisco 49ers 28\u201317. After that, they went on a 6-game winning streak. The highlight of this streak was defeating the Super Bowl XLVIII champion Seattle Seahawks at CenturyLink Field 30\u201323. In Week 8, the Washington Redskins ended the Cowboys' winning streak by winning in overtime 20\u201317, and Romo injured his back again. He missed next week, a home loss to the Arizona Cardinals 28\u201317 with backup quarterback Brandon Weeden. Romo returned in Week 9 to lead a 31\u201317 victory over the Jacksonville Jaguars, which was played at Wembley Stadium in London, England as part of the NFL International Series. Dallas played their traditional Thanksgiving home game against their division rival Philadelphia Eagles. Both teams were vying for first place in the division with identical 8\u20133 records. The Eagles got off to a fast start and the Cowboys were unable to catch up, losing 33\u201310. They would rebound the next week when they defeated the Chicago Bears 41\u201328. Week 15 was a rematch against 1st place Philadelphia. This time it was the Cowboys who got off to a fast start going up 21\u20130. Then the Eagles put up 24 points but Dallas came back to win 38\u201327 to go into first place for the first time in the season and improve to 10\u20134. Going into their Week 16 matchup at home against the Indianapolis Colts, Dallas was in a position to clinch their first division title since 2009 by defeating the Colts 42-7 and the Eagles losing that week to the Redskins. They became the 2014 NFC East Champions, eliminating the Eagles from the playoffs. Dallas ended the regular season with a 12\u20134 record and an 8\u20130 away record when they won on the road against Washington 44\u201317.\nOn January 4, 2015, the Cowboys, as the number 3 seed, hosted the number 6 seed Detroit Lions in the wild-card round of the NFL playoffs. In the game, the Lions got off to a hot start, going up 14\u20130 in the first quarter. Dallas initially struggled on both sides of the ball. However, towards the end of the second quarter, Romo threw a 76-yard touchdown pass to Terrance Williams. Matt Prater of the Lions would kick a field goal before halftime to go up 17\u20137. Dallas came out swinging to start the second half by picking off Detroit quarterback Matthew Stafford on the first play of the third quarter. However, the Cowboys failed to capitalize on the turnover, as Dan Bailey missed a field goal during Dallas's ensuing drive. Detroit then kicked another field goal to make the score 20\u20137. A DeMarco Murray touchdown later in that quarter closed the gap to 20\u201314. A 51-yard Bailey field goal almost 3 minutes into the fourth quarter trimmed the Cowboys' deficit to 3. The Lions got the ball back and started driving down the field. On 3rd down-and-1 of that Lions drive, Stafford threw a 17-yard pass intended for Lions tight end Brandon Pettigrew, but the ball hit Cowboys linebacker Anthony Hitchens in the back a fraction of a second before he ran into Pettigrew. The play was initially flagged as defensive pass interference against Hitchens. However, the penalty was then nullified by the officiating crew. The Cowboys got the ball back on their 41-yard line and had a successful 59-yard drive which was capped off by an 8-yard touchdown pass from Romo to Williams to give the Cowboys their first lead of the game at 24\u201320. The Lions got the ball back with less than 2:30 to play in regulation. Stafford fumbled the ball at the 2-minute mark. The fumble was recovered by Cowboys defensive end DeMarcus Lawrence, who then fumbled the ball which was recovered by the Lions. Lawrence would redeem himself by sacking Stafford on a 4th down-and-3 play. The sack led to Stafford fumbling the ball again, which Lawrence recovered to seal the game for the Cowboys, who won 24\u201320. This was the first time in franchise playoff history that Dallas had been down by 10 or more points at halftime and rallied to win the game.\nThe following week, the Cowboys traveled to Lambeau Field in Green Bay, Wisconsin to play the Green Bay Packers in the Divisional Round. Despite having a 14\u20137 halftime lead, the Cowboys fell to the Packers 26\u201321, thus ending their season. The season ended on an overturned call of a completed catch by Dez Bryant. The catch was challenged by the Packers, and the referees overturned the call because of the \"Calvin Johnson rule\".\nDuring the 2015 offseason the Cowboys allowed running back DeMarco Murray to become a free agent. Murray signed with the division rival Philadelphia Eagles. On July 15 wide receiver Dez Bryant signed a 5-year, $70 million contract.\nThe Cowboys started the 2015 season at home against the New York Giants, in which Dallas won 27\u201326. Dez Bryant left the game early with a fractured bone in his foot. On the road against the Philadelphia Eagles, Romo suffered a broken left collarbone, the same one he injured in 2010, and Brandon Weeden replaced him. Dallas won 20\u201310 to begin the season 2\u20130, but then went on a seven-game losing streak. They finished the season 4\u201312 and last in their division.\nIn 2016, after a preseason injury to Tony Romo, rookie quarterback Dak Prescott was slated as the starting quarterback, as Romo was expected to be out 6\u20138 weeks. In week 1 against the New York Giants, Dallas lost 20\u201319. After this loss, Dallas would go on an eleven-game winning streak. After much speculation leading to a potential quarterback controversy, Romo made an announcement that Prescott had earned the right to take over as the Cowboys starting quarterback.\nIn game 10, Romo suited up for the first time in the season and was the backup quarterback. Dallas defeated the Baltimore Ravens to win their 9th straight game, breaking a franchise record of 8 straight games set in 1977. It also marked rookie running back Ezekiel Elliott breaking Tony Dorsett's single-season rushing record for a Cowboys rookie. Prescott also tied an NFL rookie record held by Russell Wilson and Dan Marino by throwing multiple touchdowns in 5 straight games. Dallas finished 13\u20133, tying their best 16-game regular-season record. While Dallas defeated the Green Bay Packers at Lambeau Field in week 6, the Packers would win at AT&amp;T Stadium in the divisional round of the NFL playoffs on a last-second field goal, ending the Cowboys' season.\nDak Prescott was named NFL Rookie of the Year in the NFL honors on February 4, 2017, and Ezekiel Elliott led the league in rushing yards. Jason Garrett was named Coach of the Year. Both Prescott and Elliott made the 2017 Pro Bowl. This is the first time the Cowboys sent two rookies to the Pro Bowl.\n2017 was the first season since 2002 without quarterback Tony Romo, who retired on April 4 after 14 seasons with the Cowboys. The season also featured second-year running back Ezekiel Elliott being suspended for 6 games after violating the league's conduct policy. The suspension was to begin at the start of the year but was pushed back to November. The Cowboys finished the year at 9-7 without making the playoffs. Following the season, Dez Bryant was released after eight seasons in Dallas and tight end Jason Witten, who holds several franchise receiving records, retired after 15 seasons, ending an era.\nThe Dallas Cowboys' 2017 season was the subject of the third season of Amazon's sports documentary series \"All or Nothing\". The series is produced by NFL Films.\nIn the 2018 season, the Cowboys finished with a 10\u20136 record and won the NFC East. In the Wild Card Round, the Cowboys defeated the Seattle Seahawks 24\u201322 before losing 30\u201322 to the Los Angeles Rams in the Divisional Round.\nMike McCarthy years (2020\u20132024).\nFollowing the end of the 2019 season, where the Cowboys missed the playoffs for the 7th time in the last 10 seasons, it was announced that the team had parted ways with longtime head coach Jason Garrett. Both Marvin Lewis (former Bengals coach) and Mike McCarthy (former Packers coach who led Green Bay to a Super Bowl win) were interviewed for the head coaching position.\nMcCarthy and the Cowboys picked up the first win against the Atlanta Falcons in Week 2. On October 11, the Cowboys' 2020 season was all but lost when quarterback Dak Prescott suffered a grievous ankle injury that ended his season. Despite the loss of Prescott, McCarthy's first year Cowboys still remained in the running for a playoff appearance throughout most of the regular season. They would go on to finish the season with a 6\u201310 record, which ranked the team third in the NFC East Division. Throughout the 2020 season, the Cowboys' defense struggled massively. Following the season, defensive coordinator Mike Nolan and defensive line coach Jim Tomsula were dismissed.\nThe Cowboys' 2021 season resulted in the first winning season since 2018, and with the San Francisco 49ers' Week 16 loss to the Tennessee Titans, the Cowboys clinched their first playoff berth also since 2018. Following a Denver Broncos' loss to the Las Vegas Raiders, the Cowboys clinched the NFC East, based on strength-of-victory tiebreakers; this was their first division title since 2018. They swept the NFC East for the first time since 1998. Rookie Micah Parsons was awarded as Defensive Rookie of the Year, and contributed to a league-leading defense. The Cowboys' strong offense finished the year with 530 points, the most in the league, and a team record. They finished the season with a 12\u20135 record, their best since 2016. But despite high expectations, the Cowboys lost in the of the playoffs to the San Francisco 49ers 23\u201317.\nThe 2022 season saw a repeat of the 12\u20135 record. Despite losing to the Jacksonville Jaguars in Week 15, the Cowboys clinched a playoff berth after a loss by the Washington Commanders later that day. This marked the first time since 2006\u20132007 the Cowboys qualified for the postseason in consecutive seasons. Quarterback Dak Prescott was awarded as Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year, for his contributions to the community and charity. In the , the Cowboys defeated the Tampa Bay Buccaneers to win their first road playoff game since their Super Bowl-winning 1992 season, and ended their winless streak against Tom Brady in what proved to be Brady's last game in his career. However, they were defeated by the San Francisco 49ers for the second consecutive season, this time in the , their seventh consecutive divisional round defeat.\nOn February 16, 2022, a settlement of $2.4 million was paid after four cheerleaders accused Rich Dalrymple, the now-retired senior vice president of public relations and communications, of voyeurism in their locker room as they undressed during a 2015 event at AT&amp;T Stadium.\nAfter the NFL allowed teams to seek blockchain sponsorships, the Cowboys became the first team to do so, signing a multi-year contract with the platform Blockchain.com on April 13, 2022.\nIn 2023, the Cowboys again achieved a 12\u20135 record, for the third year in a row. The team won the NFC East division for the first time since the 2021 season and the second time in three seasons. They ended up in a three-way tie with the San Francisco 49ers and the Detroit Lions for first place in the NFC at 12\u20135. However, they lost the conference record tiebreaker to the 49ers but won the head to head tiebreaker over the Lions, giving them the second seed in the playoffs. Although the Cowboys lost to the Buffalo Bills in Week 15, they clinched their third straight playoff berth before taking the field when the Green Bay Packers and Atlanta Falcons lost to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and Carolina Panthers, respectively. This marked the Cowboys' first run of three consecutive postseason appearances since appearing in six straight from 1991 to 1996. However, the Cowboys collapsed in the playoffs, and, despite having one of the best-ranked offenses and defenses of the league, were crushed 48\u201332 by their rival, seventh-seeded Green Bay Packers in the Wild Card round, at one point trailing 48\u201316 during the fourth quarter. With the loss, the Cowboys became the first team to lose to a #7 seed since the playoff bracket expanded for the 2020\u201321 NFL playoffs. This also marked the first time a team failed to reach a Conference Championship Game despite winning at least 12 games in three consecutive seasons. On January 13, 2025, it was announced that McCarthy would not be returning as head coach of the Dallas Cowboys due to a contract dispute.\nBrian Schottenheimer years (2025\u2013present).\nOn January 24, 2025, it was announced that Brian Schottenheimer had been promoted from offensive coordinator to head coach.\nThanksgiving Day games.\nIn their seventh season in 1966, the Cowboys agreed to host a second NFL Thanksgiving game; the tradition of a team hosting on Thanksgiving had been popularized by the Detroit Lions (who had hosted a game on the day mostly un-interrupted since moving to Detroit in 1934). General manager Tex Schramm wanted to find a way to boost publicity on a national level for his team, which had struggled for most of the 1960s. In fact, the NFL guaranteed a cut of the gate revenue in the belief that the game would not be a hit because of said struggle. With a kickoff just after 5 p.m. CST, over eighty thousand fans (and millions viewing on CBS) saw the Cowboys beat the Cleveland Browns 26\u201314 at the Cotton Bowl.\nIn 1975 and 1977, at the behest of Commissioner Pete Rozelle, the St. Louis Cardinals replaced Dallas as a host team. Dallas then hosted St. Louis in 1976 in an effort by the NFL to give St. Louis national exposure. Although the Cardinals, at the time known as the \"Cardiac Cards\" due to their propensity for winning very close games, were a modest success at the time, the games did not prove as successful. Owing to factors that ranged from ugly contests to opposition from the Kirkwood\u2013Webster Groves Turkey Day Game (a local high school football contest) led to Dallas resuming regular hosting duties in 1978. It was then, after Rozelle asked Dallas to resume hosting Thanksgiving games, that the Cowboys requested (and received) an agreement guaranteeing the Cowboys a spot on Thanksgiving Day for good; as such, the Cowboys play in the late afternoon.\nLogos and uniforms.\nLogo.\nThe Dallas Cowboys' blue star logo, which represents Texas as \"The Lone Star State\", is one of the most well-known team logos in professional sports. The blue star originally was a solid shape until a white line and blue border were added in 1964. The logo has remained the same since. Today, the blue star has been extended to not only the Dallas Cowboys, but owner Jerry Jones' defunct AFL team, the Dallas Desperados that used a similar logo based on that of the Cowboys. The blue star also is used on other entries like an imaging facility and storage facility.\nUniforms.\nThe Dallas Cowboys' white home jersey has royal blue (PMS 287 C) solid socks, numbers, lettering, and two stripes on the sleeves outlined in black. The home pants are a common metallic silver-green color (PMS 8280 C) that helps bring out the blue in the uniform. The navy (PMS 289 C) road jerseys (nicknamed the \"Stars and Stripes\" jersey) have white lettering and numbers with navy pinstripes. A white/gray/white stripe is on each sleeve as well as the collared V-neck, and a Cowboys star logo is placed upon the stripes. A \"Cowboys\" chest crest is directly under the NFL shield. The away pants are a pearlish metallic-silver color (PMS 8180 C) and like the home pants, enhance the navy in the uniforms. The team uses a serifed font for the lettered player surnames on the jersey nameplates.\nThe team's helmets are also a unique silver with a tint of blue known as \"Metallic Silver Blue\" (PMS 8240 C) and have a blue/white/blue vertical stripe placed upon the center of the crown. The Cowboys also include a unique, if subtle, feature on the back of the helmet: a blue strip of Dymo tape with the player's name embossed, placed on the white portion of the stripe at the back of the helmet.\nHome and away uniform history.\nWhen the Dallas Cowboys franchise debuted in 1960, the team's uniform included a white helmet adorned with a simple blue star and a blue-white-blue stripe down the center crown. The team donned blue jerseys with white sleeves and a small blue star on each shoulder for home games and the negative opposite for away games. Their socks also had two horizontal white stripes overlapping the blue.\nIn 1964, the Cowboys opted for a simpler look (adopting essentially the team's current uniform) by changing their jersey/socks to one solid color with three horizontal stripes on the sleeves; the white jersey featured royal blue stripes with a narrow black border, the royal blue jersey white stripes with the same black outline. The star-shouldered jerseys were eliminated; \"TV\" numbers appeared just above the jersey stripes. The new helmet was silver-blue, with a blue-white-blue tri-stripe down the center (the middle white stripe was thicker). The blue \"lone star\" logo was retained, but with a white border setting it off from the silver/blue. The new pants were silver/blue, with a blue-white-blue tri-stripe. In 1964, the NFL allowed teams to wear white jerseys at home; several teams did so, and the Cowboys have worn white at home ever since, except on certain and special \"throwback\" days.\nIn 1966, the team modified the jerseys, which now featured only two sleeve stripes, slightly wider; the socks followed the same pattern. In 1967 the \"lone star\" helmet decal added a blue outline to the white-bordered star, giving the logo a bigger, bolder look. The logo and this version of the uniform have seen little change to the present day.\nThe only notable changes from 1970 to the present were:\nDuring the 1976 season, the blue-white-blue stripe on the crown of the helmets was temporarily changed to red-white-blue to commemorate the United States' bicentennial anniversary. This stripe configuration returned in 2021 and is now worn for one regular season game annually when the team pays tribute to Medal of Honor recipients.\nIn 1994, the NFL celebrated their 75th Anniversary, and the Dallas Cowboys celebrated their back-to-back Super Bowl titles by unveiling a white \"Double-Star\" jersey on Thanksgiving Day. This jersey was used for special occasions and was worn throughout the 1994\u201395 playoffs. During the same season, the Cowboys also wore their 1960\u201363 road jersey with a silver helmet for one game as part of a league-wide \"throwback\" policy.\nDuring the 1995 season, the team wore the navy \"Double-Star\" jersey for games at Washington and Philadelphia and permanently switched to solid color socks (royal blue for the white uniform, and navy blue for the dark uniform). The navy \"Double-Star\" jersey was not seen again until the NFL's \"Classic Throwback Weekend\" on Thanksgiving Day 2001\u20132003.\nIn 2004, the Cowboys resurrected their original 1960\u20131963 uniform on Thanksgiving Day. This uniform became the team's alternate or \"third jersey\" and was usually worn at least once a year, primarily Thanksgiving Day. Two exceptions were when the Cowboys wore their normal white uniforms on Thanksgiving in 2007 and 2008. While the team didn't wear the throwback uniform exactly on Thanksgiving Day in those two years, Dallas wore them on a date around Thanksgiving for those two years. In 2007 Dallas wore the throwback uniform on November 29, 2007, against the Green Bay Packers. In 2008 Dallas wore the throwback uniform on November 23, 2008, against the San Francisco 49ers. The team went back to wearing this uniform at home on Thanksgiving Day in 2009 while their opponent was the Oakland Raiders who wore their AFL Legacy Weekend throwbacks. Dallas wore this alternate uniform on October 11, 2009, as part of one of the NFL's AFL Legacy Weekends when they traveled to Kansas City to play the Chiefs who were sporting their AFL Dallas Texans' uniforms. This created a rare game in which neither team wore a white jersey and the first time the Cowboys wore the alternative uniform as a visiting team. The 1960\u20131963 uniform may also be used on other special occasions. Other instances include the 2005 Monday Night game against the Washington Redskins when the team inducted Troy Aikman, Emmitt Smith, and Michael Irving into the Cowboys Ring of Honor, and the 2006 Christmas Day game against the Philadelphia Eagles.\nIn 2013, the NFL issued a new helmet rule stating that players would no longer be allowed to use alternate helmets due to the league's enhanced concussion awareness. This caused the Cowboys' white 1960s throwback helmets to become non-compliant. However, this rule became moot in 2022 when the NFL once again allowed teams to use an alternate helmet again, and the Cowboys reintroduced the 1960s white helmet.\nDuring the \"one-shell era\", in 2013, 2014, 2016, and 2017, the team wore their normal blue jerseys at home for Thanksgiving; the only exceptions were in 2015 and 2020 when the Cowboys wore the \"Color Rush\" uniforms (\"see below\"), and in 2018, 2019 and 2021 when they wore their regular white uniforms. In 2017, the team initially announced that they will wear blue jerseys at home on a more regular basis, only to rescind soon after.\nIn 2015, the Cowboys released their Color Rush uniform, featuring a variation of the 1990s \"Double Star\" alternates with white pants and socks. The uniform was first used in a Thanksgiving game against the Carolina Panthers and in subsequent \"Thursday Night Football\" games since 2016. In 2022, the \"Color Rush\" uniforms would be worn with a white helmet; this design would emulate their current silver helmets but without any silver elements.\nThe Cowboys also unveiled a navy uniform-white pants combination which was first used on December 10, 2017, against the Giants.\nIn 1964, Tex Schramm started the tradition of the Cowboys wearing their white jersey at home, contrary to an unofficial rule that teams should wear colored jerseys at home. Schramm did this because he wanted fans to see a variety of opponents' colors at home games.\nAccording to current Cowboys' Equipment Director, Mike McCord, another reason why the team chose to wear white uniforms at home was because of the intense Texas heat during the early part of the season at Texas Stadium.\nThroughout the years, the Cowboys' blue jersey has been popularly viewed to be \"jinxed\" because the team often seemed to lose when they wore them. This purported curse drew attention after the team lost Super Bowl V with the blue jerseys. However, the roots of the curse likely date back earlier to the 1968 divisional playoffs, when the blue-shirted Cowboys were upset by the Cleveland Browns in what turned out to be Don Meredith's final game with the Cowboys. Another example was a 1976 regular season road game against the St. Louis Cardinals, in which the Cardinals elected to wear white as the home team and promptly defeated the then-undefeated Cowboys 21\u201317 for their first loss in six games.\nSince the white home uniform tradition began in 1964, the only season Dallas never wore blue uniforms in a regular season game was in the 1972 season, even though they wore them thrice in the preseason. The only other times Dallas wore blue in one regular season game came in 1968, 1975, 1976, 1977, 1998, 2010, and 2020. Conversely, the 2019 season saw Dallas wear their blue uniforms eight times, the most of any season.\nSince the 1970 NFL-AFL merger, league rules were changed to allow the Super Bowl home team to pick their choice of jersey. Most of the time, Dallas will wear their blue jerseys when they visit Washington, Philadelphia (sometimes), Miami, or one of the handful of other teams that traditionally wear their white jerseys at home during the first half of the season due to the hot climates in their respective cities or other means. Occasionally opposing teams will wear their white jerseys at home to try to invoke the curse, such as when the Philadelphia Eagles hosted the Cowboys in the 1980 NFC Championship Game, as well as their November 4, 2007, meeting. Various other teams followed suit in the 1980s.\nAlthough Dallas has made several tweaks to their blue jerseys over the years, Schramm said he did not believe in the curse. Since the league began allowing teams to use an alternate jersey, the Cowboys' alternates have been primarily blue versions of past jerseys and the Cowboys have generally had success when wearing these blue alternates. With the implementation of the 2013 NFL helmet rule for alternate jerseys, the team decided instead to wear their regular blue jerseys for their Thanksgiving game, something they have not done at home since Schramm started the white-jersey-at-home tradition.\nAs of the season, the Cowboys have a cumulative 99\u2013102\u20133 regular season record in their blue uniforms. They are also 16\u201313 at home while wearing the blue uniforms since 2001. The Cowboys also sport a 8\u20134 record when wearing the primary blue uniform/white pants combination since its 2017 debut.\nThe Cowboys are 2\u20136 in playoff games while wearing the blue uniforms. The only victories with the blue uniforms came in the against the Los Angeles Rams, and the against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.\nThanksgiving Day uniforms.\nWith the Dallas Cowboys traditionally hosting Thanksgiving Day games, the team donned new uniforms when they unveiled their white \"Double-Star\" jersey for the first time on November 24, 1994. This game later became synonymous with future Cowboys Head Coach (2010\u20132019); then 3rd string Quarterback Jason Garrett as he led a come-from-behind victory against the Green Bay Packers.\nIn the 2004 season, the team went further into Cowboys history by choosing to don blue jerseys worn in their first 4 years of existence, which included white helmets and pants. However, keeping consistent with modern marketing, navy blue was used for this version as opposed to the original 1960-1963 royal color jersey. Aside from the 2007 and 2008 seasons, the Cowboys continued to use this \"throwback\" uniform through Thanksgiving Day 2012.\nBefore the start of the 2013 season, the NFL announced a \"One-helmet\" rule to help prevent potential player concussions. This regulation also prevented the Cowboys from pairing the white helmets with the throwback uniforms, as the team will often use the traditional silver-blue as their primary helmets throughout the season.\nIn the 2015 season, the Cowboys chose to wear a variation of the 1994 \"Double-Star\" jersey as their Color Rush on Thanksgiving Day against the Carolina Panthers on November 26, 2015. Since then, the Color Rush was only used again on Thanksgiving against the Washington Football Team on November 26, 2020. In all other seasons, the team opted to wear their standard white or blue uniforms.\nIn 2022, the NFL restored the use of alternate helmets and the Cowboys reinstated the white helmet and navy 'throwback\" uniforms on November 24, 2022, against the New York Giants.\nStadiums.\nCotton Bowl.\nThe Cotton Bowl is a stadium which opened in 1932 and became known as \"The House That Doak Built\" due to the immense crowds that former SMU running back Doak Walker drew to the stadium during his college career in the late 1940s. Originally known as the Fair Park Bowl, it is located in Fair Park, site of the State Fair of Texas. Concerts or other events using a stage allow the playing field to be used for additional spectators. The Cotton Bowl was the longtime home of the annual Cotton Bowl Classic college football bowl game, for which the stadium is named. (Beginning with the January 2010 game, the Cotton Bowl Classic has been played at AT&amp;T Stadium in Arlington.) The Dallas Cowboys called the Cotton Bowl home for 11 years, from the team's formation in 1960 until 1971, when the Cowboys moved to Texas Stadium. It is the only Cowboys stadium within the Dallas city limits. The Cowboys hosted the Green Bay Packers for the 1966 NFL Championship at the Cotton Bowl.\nTexas Stadium.\nFor the majority of the franchise's history the Cowboys played their home games at Texas Stadium. Just outside the city of Dallas, the stadium was located in Irving. The stadium opened on October 24, 1971, at a cost of $35\u00a0million and with a seating capacity of 65,675. The stadium was famous for its hole-in-the-roof dome. The roof's worn paint had become so unsightly in the early 2000s that it was repainted in the summer of 2006 by the City of Irving. It was the first time the famed roof was repainted since Texas Stadium opened. The roof was structurally independent from the stadium it covered. The Cowboys lost their final game at Texas Stadium to the Baltimore Ravens, 33\u201324, on December 20, 2008. After Cowboys Stadium was opened in 2009, the Cowboys turned over the facility to the City of Irving.\nIn 2009, it was replaced as home of the Cowboys by Cowboys Stadium, which officially opened on May 27, 2009, in Arlington. Texas Stadium was demolished by implosion on April 11, 2010.\nAT&amp;T Stadium.\nAT&amp;T Stadium, previously named Cowboys Stadium, is a domed stadium with a retractable roof in Arlington. After failed negotiations to build a new stadium on the site of the Cotton Bowl, Jerry Jones, along with the city of Arlington, Texas, a suburb of Fort Worth, funded the stadium at a cost of $1.3\u00a0billion. The stadium is located in Tarrant County, the first time the Cowboys has called a stadium home outside of Dallas County. It was completed on May 29, 2009, and seats 80,000, but is expandable to seat up to 100,000. AT&amp;T Stadium is among the largest domed stadiums in the world.\nA highlight of AT&amp;T Stadium is its gigantic, center-hung high-definition television screen, at one point the largest in the world. The , scoreboard surpassed the screen that opened in 2009 at the renovated Kauffman Stadium in Kansas City as the world's largest. In 2011, Charlotte Motor Speedway unveiled its plans for a new HDTV screen larger than the one in AT&amp;T Stadium; that larger screen has since been completed.\nAt the debut pre-season game of Cowboys Stadium, a punt by Tennessee Titans kicker, A. J. Trapasso, hit the 2,100 in. screen above the field. The punt deflected and was ruled in-play until Titans coach Jeff Fisher informed the officials that the punt struck the scoreboard. (Many believe Trapasso was trying to hit the suspended scoreboard, based on replays and the angle of the kick.) The scoreboard is, however, within the regulation of the NFL guidelines \u2013 hanging approximately five feet above the minimum height. No punts hit the scoreboard during the entire 2009 regular season during an actual game. Also, on August 22, 2009, the day after AJ Trapasso hit the screen, many fans touring the facility noted that half of the field was removed with large cranes re-positioning the screen. According to some fans, a tour guide explained that Jerry Jones invited a few professional soccer players to drop kick soccer balls to try to hit the screen. Once he observed them hitting it consistently he had the screen moved up another 10 feet.\nThe first regular season home game of the 2009 season was against the New York Giants. A league record-setting 105,121 fans showed up to fill Cowboys Stadium for the game before which the traditional \"blue star\" at the 50-yard line was unveiled for the first time; however, the Cowboys lost in the final seconds, 33\u201331.\nThe Cowboys got their first regular-season home win on September 28, 2009. They beat the Carolina Panthers 21\u20137 with 90,588 in attendance. The game was televised on ESPN's \"Monday Night Football\" and marked a record 42nd win for the Cowboys on \"Monday Night Football\".\nOn July 25, 2013, the Cowboys announced that AT&amp;T would be taking over the rights to the name of the stadium.\nTraining camp sites.\nDallas Cowboys training camp locations:\nNationwide fanbase.\nFan support.\nEver since the team joined the NFL in 1960, the franchise have garnered strong fan support in both the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex and the state of Texas. With its strong fanbase across the country, including the notable presence of fans at road games, the Cowboys are often referred to as \"America's Team\".\nCriticism.\nDespite the historical success of the franchise and a large Cowboys' fanbase, many fans of other NFL teams have come to dislike the Cowboys. Over the years, the Cowboys' fanbase had been labeled as the most annoying in all of sports. ESPN host and commentator Stephen A. Smith has validated this claim.\nRivalries.\nThe NFC East, composed of the Cowboys, Philadelphia Eagles, the Washington Commanders and New York Giants, is one of the least-changed divisions of the original six formed in the wake of the NFL-AFL merger (its only major changes being the relocation of the Cardinals franchise from St. Louis to Arizona and its subsequent move to the NFC West in the league's 2002 realignment). Three of the four teams have been division rivals since the Cowboys' entry into the NFL. As such, the Cowboys have some of the longest and fiercest rivalries in the sport.\nDivisional.\nPhiladelphia Eagles.\nThe competition between the Cowboys and the Philadelphia Eagles has been particularly intense since the late 1970s, when the long-moribund Eagles returned to contention. In January 1981, the two teams faced off in the NFC Championship, with Philadelphia winning 20\u20137. A series of other factors heightened tensions during the 1980s and 1990s, including several provocative actions by Philadelphia fans and Eagles head coach Buddy Ryan. Among these were the 1989 Bounty Bowls in which Ryan allegedly placed a bounty on Dallas kicker Luis Zendejas and Veterans Stadium fans pelted the Cowboys with snowballs and other debris.\nA 1999 game in Philadelphia saw Eagles fans cheering as Michael Irvin lay motionless on the field at Veterans Stadium. In 2008, the rivalry became more intense when in the last game of the year in which both teams could clinch a playoff spot with a victory, the Philadelphia Eagles defeated the Cowboys 44\u20136. The following season, the Cowboys avenged that defeat by beating the Eagles three times: twice during the regular season to claim the title as NFC East champions and once more in a wild-card playoff game by a combined score of 78\u201330, including a 24\u20130 shutout in week 17. That three-game sweep was Dallas' first over any opponent and the longest winning streak against the Eagles since 1992\u20131995 when Dallas won seven straight matches against Philadelphia.\nDuring the 2013 season, Dallas won the first meeting 17\u20133 at Lincoln Financial Field in Philadelphia. The two teams met again in Week 17 at AT&amp;T Stadium with the winner clinching the 2013 NFC East title. The Cowboys came into the game at a disadvantage with starting quarterback Tony Romo out with a season-ending back injury, which put backup Kyle Orton as the starter. It was a tight game with the Eagles up 24\u201322 with less than 2 minutes to go in regulation. Orton got the ball and started driving down the field when he was intercepted by the Eagles defense, which ended the game and the Cowboys season. In 2014, the Cowboys and Eagles both won against each other on the road with Philadelphia posting a dominant 33\u201310 win on Thanksgiving Day in Dallas, and Dallas returning the favor two weeks later by defeating the Eagles 38\u201327 at Lincoln Financial Field in Philadelphia. The second game between these rivals clinched a playoff spot for Dallas and led to formerly first-place Philadelphia missing out on the post-season. Dallas leads the all-time series 73\u201356.\nNew York Giants.\nThe first game ever played between the New York Giants and Cowboys was a 31\u201331 tie on December 4, 1960. Dallas logged its first win in the series on October 29, 1961, and New York's first was on November 11, 1962. Among the more notable moments in the rivalry was the Giants' defeat of Dallas in the 2007 playoffs en route to their victory in Super Bowl XLII and winning the first regular-season game played at Cowboys Stadium in 2009. Dallas currently leads the all-time series 75\u201347\u20132.\nWashington Commanders.\nThe Washington Commanders and the Dallas Cowboys enjoy what has been called by \"Sports Illustrated\" the top NFL rivalry of all time and \"one of the greatest in sports\". Some sources trace the enmity to before the Cowboys were even formed, due to a longstanding disagreement between Washington owner George Preston Marshall and Cowboys founder Clint Murchison, Jr. over the creation of a new football team in the South, due to Marshall's TV monopoly in that region. The two teams' storied on-field rivalry goes back to 1960 when the two clubs first played each other, resulting in a 26\u201314 Washington victory. Since that time, the two teams have met in 126 regular-season contests and two NFC Championships. Dallas leads the regular season all-time series 78\u201346\u20132, and Washington leads the all-time playoff series 2\u20130. The Cowboys currently have a 14\u20137 advantage over Washington at FedEx Field. Some notable moments in the rivalry include Washington's victory over Dallas in the 1982 NFC Championship and the latter's 1989 win over Washington for their only victory that season. The last Cowboys game with Tom Landry as coach was a win over Washington on December 11, 1988. In the 2010s, Washington has struggled to consistently compete for the Division title, but still play the Cowboys particularly tough, posting an impressive upset victory against Dallas in 2014, despite being outclassed by the Cowboys in the overall standings. The 2010s also included an important game in week 17 of 2012 which saw Washington defeat Dallas 28\u201318 to win the NFC East.\nConference.\nSan Francisco 49ers.\nThe bitter rivalry between the Dallas Cowboys and San Francisco 49ers has been going on since the 1970s. The NFL Top 10 ranked this rivalry to be the tenth best in the history of the NFL. San Francisco has played Dallas in seven postseason games. The Cowboys defeated the 49ers in the 1970 and 1971 NFC Championship games, and again in the 1972 Divisional Playoff Game. The 1981 NFC Championship Game in San Francisco, which saw the 49ers' Joe Montana complete a game-winning pass to Dwight Clark in the final minute (now known as The Catch) is one of the most famous games in NFL history. The rivalry became even more intense during the 1992\u20131994 seasons. San Francisco and Dallas faced each other in the NFC Championship Game three separate times. Dallas won the first two match-ups, and San Francisco won the third. In each of these pivotal match-ups, the game's victor went on to win the Super Bowl. Both the Cowboys and the 49ers are tied for third all-time in Super Bowl victories to the Pittsburgh Steelers and New England Patriots, with five each. The 49ers-Cowboys rivalry is also part of the larger cultural rivalry between California and Texas. The 49ers lead the all-time series with a record of 20\u201319\u20131.\nGreen Bay Packers.\nThe rivalry between the Dallas Cowboys and the Green Bay Packers is one of the best known intra-conference rivalries in the NFL. The two teams do not play every year; instead, they play once every three years due to the NFL's rotating division schedules, or if the two teams finish in the same place in their respective divisions, they would play the ensuing season. The rivalry has also resulted in notable playoff games.\nThe all-time regular seasons series record is 20\u201317 in favor of the Packers, and the postseason series is also in favor of the Packers at 5\u20134.\nLos Angeles Rams.\nThe Cowboys also had a fierce rivalry with the Los Angeles Rams, particularly during the 1970s and 1980s. The two teams played eight postseason games during this period, including two NFC championship games. Between 1975 and 1980, the Cowboys faced the Rams in the playoffs five times in a six-year period. In both 1975 and 1978, the Cowboys won the NFC championship on the road in blowout fashion, only to be followed by close defeats at home in next year's divisional round. The 1980 Wild Card Round saw Dallas follow up last year's playoff defeat with another blowout victory. As of 2022, the Cowboys and Rams tied the all-time regular season series 18\u201318, but the Rams lead the all-time playoff series 5\u20134, having recently defeated the Cowboys in the 2018 Divisional Round.\nMinnesota Vikings.\nBetween the Dallas Cowboys and Minnesota Vikings, the Cowboys lead the all-time series 18\u201315. The teams have met seven times in the post-season, the Cowboys third most played playoff opponent. The rivalry is home to many key memories, including the famous 1975 Hail Mary pass against the Vikings, the Herschel Walker trade, the Randy Moss Thanksgiving game, and Brett Favre torching the Cowboys in what would be his last playoff win of his career in 2009. As of the 2023 season, the Cowboys lead the all-time series 19\u201315.\nInter Conference.\nHouston Oilers/Houston Texans.\nThe Cowboys have an intrastate interconference rivalry with the Houston Texans for which they compete in either a preseason or regular season game for bragging rights in Texas, a tradition started between the teams prior to the Oilers relocating to Nashville, Tennessee to become the Tennessee Titans. The Texans defeated the Cowboys in the team's inaugural season in 2002. The Cowboys lead the all-time series 4\u20132.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nThe two teams met in the first regular-season game the Cowboys ever played in 1960 (a 35\u201328 loss to the Steelers), the first-ever regular-season victory for the expansion Cowboys in 1961, and would later meet in three Super Bowls, all of them closely contested events. The Steelers-Cowboys is to date the Super Bowl matchup with the most contests. The Steelers won Super Bowl X and Super Bowl XIII; both games were decided in the final seconds, first on a last-second throw by Roger Staubach, then as a fourth-quarter rally by Dallas fell short on an onside kick. The Cowboys won Super Bowl XXX in January 1996. It is said that the rivalry was fueled in the 1970s due to the stark contrast of the teams: the Cowboys, being more of a \"flashy\" team with Roger Staubach's aerial attack and the \"flex\" Doomsday Defense; while the Steelers were more of a \"blue-collar\" team with a strong running game and the 1970s-esque Steel Curtain defense, a contrast that still exists today. In addition, both teams have national fan bases rivaled by few NFL teams, and both come from areas with a strong following for football at all levels. Dallas leads the all-time series 17\u201316 including the playoffs.\nPlayers of note.\nSuper Bowl MVPs.\nThe Cowboys have had seven players win Super Bowl MVP.\nRing of Honor.\nUnlike many NFL teams, the Cowboys do not retire jersey numbers of past standouts as a matter of policy. Instead, the team has a \"Ring of Honor\", which is on permanent display encircling the field. Originally at Texas Stadium, the ring is now on display at AT&amp;T Stadium in Arlington. The first inductee was Bob Lilly in 1975 and by 2005, the ring contained 17 names, all former Dallas players except for one head coach and one general manager/president.\nThe Ring of Honor has been a source of controversy over the years. Tex Schramm was believed to be a \"one-man committee\" in choosing inductees and many former Cowboys players and fans felt that Schramm deliberately excluded linebacker Lee Roy Jordan because of a bitter contract dispute the two had during Jordan's playing days. When Jerry Jones bought the team he inherited Schramm's Ring of Honor \"power\" and immediately inducted Jordan.\nJones also has sparked controversy regarding his decisions in handling the \"Ring of Honor\". For four years he was unsuccessful in convincing Tom Landry to accept induction. Meanwhile, he refused to induct Tex Schramm (even after Schramm's induction to the Pro Football Hall of Fame). In 1993, thanks in part to the efforts of Roger Staubach as an intermediary, Landry accepted induction and had a ceremony on the day of that year's Cowboys-Giants game (Landry had played and coached for the Giants). In 2003, Jones chose to induct Tex Schramm. Schramm and Jones held a joint press conference at Texas Stadium announcing the induction. Unfortunately, Schramm did not live to see his ceremonial induction at the Cowboys-Eagles game that fall.\nTroy Aikman, all-time NFL leading rusher Emmitt Smith, and Michael Irvin, known as \"The Triplets\", were inducted into the Ring of Honor during halftime at a Monday Night Football home game against the archrival Washington Redskins on September 19, 2005.\nDefensive end Charles Haley, offensive lineman Larry Allen, and wide receiver Drew Pearson were inducted into the Ring of Honor during halftime of the Cowboys' game vs. the Seattle Seahawks on November 6, 2011.\nSafety Darren Woodson was inducted on November 1, 2015. Executive Gil Brandt was inducted on November 29, 2018.\nThe most recent inductees were DeMarcus Ware, who was inducted on October 29, 2023, and Jimmy Johnson, who was inducted on December 30, 2023.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Dallas Cowboys do not officially retire jersey numbers; however, some are kept \"unofficially inactive\". As of 2022, six numbers have been kept out of circulation: Troy Aikman's No. 8, Roger Staubach's No. 12, Bob Hayes' and Emmitt Smith's No. 22, Bob Lilly's No. 74, and Jason Witten's No. 82. The Cowboys are one of three NFL teams that do not officially retire numbers, with the other two being the Atlanta Falcons and Las Vegas Raiders.\nAll-time first-round draft picks.\nThe Cowboys have had the number one overall pick in the NFL Draft on three occasions.\nRadio and television.\n, the Cowboys' flagship radio station is KRLD-FM. Brad Sham is the team's longtime play-by-play voice. Working alongside him is former Cowboy quarterback Babe Laufenberg, who returned in 2007 after a one-year absence to replace former safety Charlie Waters. The Cowboys, who retain rights to all announcers, chose not to renew Laufenberg's contract in 2006 and brought in Waters. However, Laufenberg did work as the analyst on the \"Blue Star Network\", which televises Cowboys preseason games not shown on national networks. The anchor station is KTVT, the CBS owned and operated station in Dallas. Previous stations which aired Cowboys games included KVIL-FM, KRLD, and KLUV-FM. Kristi Scales is the sideline reporter on the radio broadcasts.\nDuring his tenure as Cowboys coach, Tom Landry co-hosted his own coach's show with late veteran sportscaster Frank Glieber and later with Brad Sham. Landry's show was famous for his analysis of raw game footage and for him and his co-host making their NFL \"predictions\" at the end of each show. Glieber is one of the original voices of the Cowboys Radio Network, along with Bill Mercer, famous for calling the \"Ice Bowl\" of 1967 and both Super Bowl V and VI. Mercer is perhaps best known as the ringside commentator of WCCW in the 1980s. Upon Mercer's departure, Verne Lundquist joined the network, and became their play-by-play announcer by 1977, serving eight years in that capacity before handing those chores permanently over to Brad Sham, who joined the network in 1977 as the color analyst and occasional fill-in for Lundquist.\nLongtime WFAA-TV sports anchor Dale Hansen was the Cowboys color analyst with Brad Sham as the play-by-play announcer from 1985 to 1996.\nDave Garrett served as the Cowboys' play-by-play announcer from 1995 to 1997, when Brad Sham left the team and joined the Texas Rangers' radio network team as well as broadcast Sunday Night Football on Westwood One.\nSeeking to expand its radio broadcasting scope nationally, the Cowboys began a five-year partnership with Compass Media Networks on February 2, 2011. The result was the America's Team Radio Network, a supplement to the franchise's regional one. Beginning with the 2011 season, Kevin Burkhardt and Danny White handled the broadcasts, with Jerry Recco as the studio host.\nFight song.\nThe Dallas Cowboys fight song, \"Cowboys Stampede March\" by Tom Merriman Big Band was the official fight song of the Dallas Cowboys. The Cowboys now play We Dem Boyz by Wiz Khalifa for starting defensive line, because of the saying \"How Bout Dem Cowboys\". For every touchdown scored by the Cowboys at a home game the song \"Cowboys and Cut Cigars\" by The Burning of Rome is played after a train horn."}
{"id": "8122", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8122", "title": "Denver Broncos", "text": "The Denver Broncos are a professional American football team based in Denver. The Broncos compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) West division. The team is headquartered in Dove Valley, Colorado.\nThe team began play in 1960 as a charter member of the American Football League (AFL) and joined the NFL as part of the merger in 1970. The Broncos are currently owned by the Walton-Penner group. Since 2001, the Broncos have played their regular season home games at Empower Field at Mile High; Denver previously played its home games at Mile High Stadium from its inception in 1960 through the 2000 season.\nThe Broncos were barely competitive during their 10-year run in the AFL and their first three years in the NFL. They did not have a winning season until 1973 and qualified for their first playoffs in 1977, eventually advancing to Super Bowl XII that season. From 1973 to 2016, the Broncos suffered only eleven losing seasons and won 3 Super Bowls, becoming one of the NFL's most successful teams. They have won eight AFC Championships (, , , , , , , ), and three Super Bowl championships ( (XXXII), (XXXIII), (50), and share the NFL record for most Super Bowl losses (5\u00a0\u2013 tied with the New England Patriots). The Broncos have nine primary members enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame: John Elway, Floyd Little, Shannon Sharpe, Gary Zimmerman, Terrell Davis, Champ Bailey, Steve Atwater, and Randy Gradishar, along with late club owner Pat Bowlen.\nAccording to \"Forbes\", the Broncos are valued at $4.65 billion in July 2022 making them the twelfth most-valuable team in the NFL.\nHistory.\nBob Howsam/Gerald Phipps era (1960\u20131980).\nThe Denver Broncos were founded on August 14, 1959, when minor league baseball owner Bob Howsam was awarded an American Football League (AFL) charter franchise. The Broncos won the first-ever AFL game over the Boston Patriots 13\u201310, on September 9, 1960. Seven years later on August 5, 1967, they became the first-ever AFL team to defeat an NFL team, with a 13\u20137 win over the Detroit Lions in a preseason game. However, the Broncos were not successful in the 1960s, winning more than five games only once (7\u20137, 1962), compiling a record during the ten seasons of the AFL.\nDenver came close to losing its franchise in 1965, until a local ownership group took control, and rebuilt the team. The team's first superstar, \"Franchise\" Floyd Little, was instrumental in keeping the team in Denver, due to his signing in 1967 as well as his Pro Bowl efforts on and off the field. The Broncos were the only original AFL team that never played in the title game, as well as the only original AFL team never to have a winning season while a member of the AFL during the upstart league's 10-year history.\nIn 1972, the Broncos hired former Stanford University coach John Ralston as their head coach. In 1973, he was the UPI's AFC Coach of the Year, after Denver achieved its first winning season at 7\u20135\u20132. In five seasons with the Broncos, Ralston guided the team to three winning seasons. Though Ralston finished the 1976 season with a 9\u20135 record, the team, as was the case in Ralston's previous winning seasons, still missed the playoffs. Following the season, several prominent players publicly voiced their discontent with Ralston, which soon led to his resignation.\nRed Miller, a long-time assistant coach, was hired and along with the Orange Crush Defense (a nickname originated in 1977, also the brand of the popular orange-flavored soft drink) and aging quarterback Craig Morton, took the Broncos to what was then a record-setting 12\u20132 regular-season record and their first playoff appearance in 1977, and ultimately made their first Super Bowl appearance in Super Bowl XII, in which they were defeated by the Dallas Cowboys (Morton's former team), 27\u201310.\nEdgar Kaiser/Pat Bowlen era (1981\u20132018).\nIn 1981, Broncos' owner Gerald Phipps, who had purchased the team in May 1961 from the original owner Bob Howsam, sold the team to Canadian financier Edgar Kaiser Jr., grandson of shipbuilding industrialist Henry J. Kaiser. In 1984, the team was purchased by another Canadian, Pat Bowlen, who placed team ownership into a family trust sometime before 2004 and remained in day-to-day control until his battle with Alzheimer's disease forced him to cede the team to Joe Ellis in 2014.\nDan Reeves years (1981\u20131992).\nDan Reeves became the youngest head coach (37) in the NFL when he joined the Broncos in 1981 as vice president and head coach. Quarterback John Elway, who played college football at Stanford, arrived in 1983 via a trade. Originally drafted by the Baltimore Colts as the first pick of the draft, Elway proclaimed that he would shun football in favor of baseball (he was drafted by the New York Yankees to play center field and was also a pitching prospect), unless he was traded to a selected list of other teams, which included the Broncos. Prior to Elway, the Broncos had over 24 different starting quarterbacks in its 23 seasons to that point.\nReeves and Elway guided the Broncos to six post-season appearances, five AFC West divisional titles, three AFC championships and three Super Bowl appearances (Super Bowl XXI, XXII and XXIV) during their 12-year span together. The Broncos lost Super Bowl XXI to the New York Giants, 39\u201320; Super Bowl XXII to the Washington Redskins, 42\u201310; and Super Bowl XXIV to the San Francisco 49ers, 55\u201310; the latter score remains the most lopsided scoring differential in Super Bowl history. The last year of the Reeves-Elway era were marked by feuding, due to Reeves taking on play-calling duties after ousting Elway's favorite offensive coordinator Mike Shanahan after the 1991 season, as well as Reeves drafting quarterback Tommy Maddox out of UCLA instead of going with a wide receiver to help Elway. Reeves was fired after the 1992 season and replaced by his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 and friend Wade Phillips, who had been serving as the Broncos' defensive coordinator. Phillips was fired after a mediocre 1994 season, in which management felt he lost control of the team.\nMike Shanahan years (1995\u20132008).\nIn 1995, Mike Shanahan, who had formerly served under Reeves as the Broncos' offensive coordinator, returned as head coach. The team went 8\u20138 in 1995. Shanahan drafted rookie running back Terrell Davis. In 1996, the Broncos were the top seed in the AFC with a 13\u20133 record, dominating most of the teams that year. The fifth-seeded Jacksonville Jaguars, however, upset the Broncos 30\u201327 in the divisional round of the playoffs, ending the Broncos' 1996 run.\nSuper Bowl XXXII champions (1997).\nDuring the 1997 season, Elway and Davis helped guide the Broncos to their first Super Bowl victory, a 31\u201324 win over the defending champion Green Bay Packers in Super Bowl XXXII. Though Elway completed only 13 of 22 passes, throwing one interception and no touchdowns (he did, however, have a rushing touchdown), Davis rushed for 157 yards and a Super Bowl-record three touchdowns to earn the Super Bowl Most Valuable Player Award\u2014this while overcoming a severe migraine headache that caused him blurred vision.\nSuper Bowl XXXIII champions (1998).\nThe Broncos repeated as Super Bowl champions the following season, defeating the Atlanta Falcons (led by Elway's longtime head coach Dan Reeves) in Super Bowl XXXIII, 34\u201319. Elway was named Super Bowl MVP, completing 18 of 29 passes for 336 yards, with an 80-yard touchdown to wide receiver Rod Smith and one interception.\nJohn Elway retired following the 1998 season, and Brian Griese started at quarterback for the next four seasons. After a 6\u201310 record in 1999, mostly due to a season-ending injury to Terrell Davis, the Broncos recovered in 2000, earning a Wild Card playoff berth, but losing to the eventual Super Bowl champion Baltimore Ravens. After missing the playoffs the following two seasons, former Arizona Cardinals' quarterback Jake Plummer replaced Griese in 2003, and led the Broncos to two straight 10\u20136 seasons, earning Wild Card playoff berths both years. However, the Broncos went on the road to face the Indianapolis Colts in back-to-back seasons and were blown out by more than 20 points in each game, allowing a combined 90 points.\nIn the years following the back-to-back championships, a league investigation found that the team had circumvented the salary cap in both seasons and the 1996 season by deferring additional money to Elway and Davis outside of the salary cap. In addition, they purposefully avoided waiving certain players before a certain date. Denver claimed the moves did not give them additional competitive advantage. The NFL gave no formal statement, although between two separate punishments stripped the team of their third-round picks in the 2002 and 2005 drafts and fined them nearly $2\u00a0million combined. \nPlummer led the Broncos to a 13\u20133 record in 2005 and their first AFC West division title since 1998. After a first-round bye, the Broncos defeated the defending Super Bowl champion New England Patriots, 27\u201313, denying New England from becoming the first NFL team ever to win three consecutive Super Bowl championships. They were the first team to beat the Patriots in the playoffs during the Tom Brady era. The Broncos' playoff run came to an end the next week, after losing at home to the Pittsburgh Steelers in the AFC Championship game, 34\u201317.\nThe Broncos' defense began the first five games of the 2006 season allowing only one touchdown\u00a0\u2014 an NFL record that still stands. ESPN commentator and Super Bowl-winning quarterback Joe Theismann gave the 2006 defense the name \"Bad Blue\" on \"Monday Night Football\" as they played the Ravens. However, the team struggled down the season stretch. Plummer led the team to a 7\u20132 record, but struggled individually with inconsistent performance and more interceptions than touchdown passes. As a result, he would be replaced by rookie quarterback Jay Cutler. Cutler went 2\u20133 as a starter, and the Broncos finished with a 9\u20137 record, losing the tiebreaker to the Kansas City Chiefs for the final playoff spot. Cutler's first full season as a starter in 2007 became the Broncos' first losing season since 1999, with a 7\u20139 record.\nThe 2008 season ended in a 52\u201321 loss at the San Diego Chargers, giving the Broncos an 8\u20138 record and their third straight season out of the playoffs. Mike Shanahan, the longest-tenured and most successful head coach in Broncos' franchise history, was fired after 14 seasons.\nJosh McDaniels years (2009\u20132010).\nOn January 11, 2009, two weeks after Shanahan was fired, the Broncos hired former New England Patriots' offensive coordinator Josh McDaniels as the team's new head coach. Three months later, the team acquired quarterback Kyle Orton as part of a trade that sent Jay Cutler to the Chicago Bears.\nUnder McDaniels and Orton, the Broncos jumped out to a surprising 6\u20130 start in 2009. However, the team lost eight of their next ten games, finishing 8\u20138 for a second consecutive season and missing the playoffs. The next season (2010), the Broncos set a new franchise record for losses in a single season, with a 4\u201312 record. McDaniels was fired before the end of the 2010 season following a combination of the team's poor record and the fallout from a highly publicized videotaping scandal. Running backs coach Eric Studesville was named interim coach for the final four games of the 2010 season. He chose to start rookie first-round draft choice Tim Tebow at quarterback for the final three games.\nJohn Fox years (2011\u20132014).\nFollowing the 2010 season, Joe Ellis was promoted from chief operating officer to team president, while John Elway returned to the organization as the team's executive vice president of football operations. In addition, the Broncos hired John Fox as the team's 14th head coach. Fox previously served as the Carolina Panthers' head coach from 2002 to 2010.\nFollowing a 1\u20134 start to the 2011 season, Tim Tebow replaced Kyle Orton as the Broncos' starting quarterback, and \"Tebow Time\" was born. Tebow led the Broncos with toughness, determination and miraculous come-from-behind victories which gave the Broncos hope and were the catalyst for better things to come. Tebow led the Broncos to an 8\u20138 record and garnered the team's first playoff berth and division title since 2005. The Broncos defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers in the Wild Card round on a memorable 80-yard touchdown pass from Tebow to wide receiver Demaryius Thomas on the first play of overtime, setting a record for the fastest overtime in NFL history. However, the Broncos lost to the New England Patriots in the Divisional round.\nIn March 2012, the Broncos reached an agreement on a five-year, $96\u00a0million contract with former longtime Indianapolis Colts' quarterback Peyton Manning, who had recently missed the entire season following multiple neck surgeries. This resulted in the Broncos subsequently trading incumbent quarterback Tim Tebow to the New York Jets. The Broncos finished with a 13\u20133 record and the AFC's No. 1 seed in the 2012 playoffs, but were defeated by the Baltimore Ravens in the Divisional round.\nLike in 2012, the 2013 Broncos finished with a 13\u20133 record and the AFC's No. 1 seed. The Broncos broke all offensive records and QB Peyton Manning shattered many quarterback records that season as well. In the 2013 playoffs, they defeated the San Diego Chargers in the Divisional round and the New England Patriots in the AFC Championship. However, the Broncos lost to the Seattle Seahawks in Super Bowl XLVIII by a score of 43\u20138, the Broncos' first Super Bowl berth since winning back-to-back Super Bowls in 1997 and 1998.\nPrior to the start of the 2014 season, the Broncos announced that Pat Bowlen, the team's owner since 1984, relinquished control of the team due to his battle with Alzheimer's disease, resulting in team president Joe Ellis and general manager John Elway assuming control of the team. The Broncos finished the 2014 season with a 12\u20134 record and the AFC's No. 2 seed. However, the Broncos were defeated by the Indianapolis Colts in the Divisional round of the 2014 playoffs, marking the third time in four seasons that the Broncos lost in the Divisional round of the playoffs. Quarterback Peyton Manning had been playing with strained quadriceps for the final month of the 2014 season.\nGary Kubiak years (2015\u20132016).\nOn January 12, 2015, one day after the divisional playoff loss to the Colts, the Broncos and head coach John Fox mutually agreed to part ways. Fox left the Broncos with a .719 winning percentage in his four seasons as the Broncos' head coach\u2014the highest in franchise history. One week later, the Broncos hired Gary Kubiak as the team's 15th head coach. Kubiak served as a backup quarterback to executive vice president/general manager John Elway from 1983 to 1991, as well as the Broncos' offensive coordinator from 1995 to 2005.\nShortly after Kubiak became head coach, the Broncos underwent numerous changes to their coaching staff and players, including the hiring of defensive coordinator, defensive mastermind Wade Phillips, under whom the Broncos' defense went from middle of the road to being ranked No. 1 in the NFL. By the 2015 season, it would go on to be considered one of the greatest NFL defenses of all time\u00a0\u2014 along with the 1985 Bears, 2000 Ravens and 2002 Buccaneers. The Broncos finished with a 12\u20134 record and the AFC's No. 1 seed, despite Peyton Manning having his worst statistical season since his rookie year with the Indianapolis Colts in . Backup quarterback Brock Osweiler started the last six games of the regular season due to Manning suffering from a foot injury. Manning led the Broncos throughout the playoffs. The Broncos defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers 23\u201316 in the Divisional Round and the New England Patriots 20\u201318 in the AFC Championship. They were victorious against the Carolina Panthers 24\u201310 in Super Bowl 50 for their third Super Bowl title.\nOn March 7, 2016, quarterback Peyton Manning retired after 18 NFL seasons during a press conference at the team's Dove Valley headquarters.\nFollowing Manning's retirement, the Broncos scrambled to find the team's next starting quarterback after backup quarterback Brock Osweiler departed on a four-year contract to the Houston Texans. The Broncos acquired Mark Sanchez from the Philadelphia Eagles and selected Paxton Lynch during the 2016 draft. Sanchez, Lynch and second-year quarterback Trevor Siemian competed for the starting quarterback spot during the off-season and preseason. Prior to the regular season, Sanchez was released and Siemian was named the starter. The Broncos finished the season 9\u20137 and missed the playoffs for the first time since 2010.\nOn January 2, 2017, coach Gary Kubiak announced his retirement, citing health as the main reason for retiring.\nVance Joseph years (2017\u20132018).\nThe Broncos hired Miami Dolphins defensive coordinator Vance Joseph as head coach on January 11, 2017. The Broncos finished 5\u201311 in 2017 as a result of an unimpressive offense led by a quarterback committee of Trevor Siemian, Brock Osweiler, and Paxton Lynch.\nIn an effort to address poor production from the offense, the Broncos signed quarterback Case Keenum on March 14, 2018, and traded away Trevor Siemian to the Minnesota Vikings on March 19, 2018.\nOn May 1, 2018, the Broncos signed local undrafted free agent running back Phillip Lindsay, who became a fan favorite due to his underdog mentality, explosive play style and local roots. Lindsay became the first undrafted player in NFL history with 100+ scrimmage yards in each of their first two games and on December 18, 2018, Lindsay was voted to the 2019 Pro Bowl, making him the first undrafted offensive rookie in NFL history to be voted to a Pro Bowl.\nAfter getting off to a strong start, their 2018 season was up and down, eventually finishing with a 6\u201310 record and placing third in the AFC West. Coupled with the 5\u201311 season in 2017, the Broncos had back-to-back losing seasons for the first time since 1971\u20131972. Shortly after the conclusion of the regular season, head coach Vance Joseph was fired after recording a poor 11\u201321 record in two seasons.\nVic Fangio years (2019\u20132021).\nOn January 10, 2019, the Broncos hired Chicago Bears defensive coordinator Vic Fangio to become the 17th head coach in franchise history. Fangio was chosen over Mike Munchak, the Broncos' offensive line coach. Fangio received a four-year contract with a team option for an additional season.\nOn February 13, 2019, Joe Flacco was traded to the Broncos from the Baltimore Ravens. On October 6, 2019, the Broncos defeated the Los Angeles Chargers for their 500th win, bringing their win\u2013loss record to 500\u2013432.\nOn December 1, 2019, the Broncos started Mizzou rookie quarterback Drew Lock for the first time. He led the Broncos to a 4\u20131 record to end the 2019 season. The Broncos finished 2nd place in the AFC West Division at 7\u20139, missing the playoffs for a fourth consecutive year. In five games, Lock finished with 1,020 passing yards, seven touchdowns, and three interceptions.\nDue to the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2020 NFL season did not have a preseason or full training camps, which likely contributed to an abnormally large amount of injuries that plagued the Broncos and other NFL teams. Star linebacker Von Miller suffered a season-ending ankle tendon injury before the regular season started, and starting wide receiver Courtland Sutton suffered a season-ending torn ACL during a week two game.\nOn November 29, 2020, after all three of the Broncos' quarterbacks were placed in COVID-19 protocol, the Broncos were forced to turn to undrafted wide receiver and former college quarterback Kendall Hinton as the emergency quarterback. Hinton completed only one pass for 13 yards in 9 attempts\u2014the fewest pass completions in a single game in franchise history\u2014and was intercepted twice. The Broncos' only scoring play was a 58-yard field goal by placekicker Brandon McManus in a 31\u20133 loss to the New Orleans Saints. In July 2021, the Pro Football Hall of Fame announced that Hinton's quarterback wristband would be added to the Hall of Fame as part of a display.\nThe Broncos finished the 2020 season with a record of 5\u201311, last in the AFC West, and missed the playoffs for the fifth consecutive year.\nFollowing another season of uninspiring quarterback performances, the Broncos were the subject of multiple quarterback trade rumors during the 2021 offseason. Aaron Rodgers and Deshaun Watson were two names rumored to be of interest for the Broncos, but ultimately the Broncos traded for quarterback Teddy Bridgewater on April 28, 2021. Bridgewater won the subsequent quarterback competition between himself and Drew Lock during the preseason, and he was named the Broncos' starting quarterback on August 25, 2021.\nThe Broncos also made notable improvements in the defensive secondary, signing former All-Pro cornerback Kyle Fuller and cornerback Ronald Darby, as well as drafting Alabama cornerback Patrick Surtain II with the ninth overall pick in the 2021 NFL draft. Running back Phillip Lindsay was replaced by UNC rookie running back Javonte Williams, who was drafted in the second round of the 2021 NFL draft by the Broncos.\nOn October 31, 2021, Peyton Manning (who won two AFC Championships, Super Bowl 50, and an NFL MVP during his four seasons as a Bronco) was inducted to the Broncos' Ring of Fame during a game against Washington.\nOn November 1, 2021, the Broncos traded franchise legend Von Miller to the Los Angeles Rams in exchange for a 2nd and 3rd round pick in the 2022 NFL draft. At the time of the trade, Miller was the longest-tenured Bronco on the team, and the only remaining non-special teams player from Denver's Super Bowl 50 roster.\nAfter another mediocre performance in the 2021 season with the Broncos going 7\u201310, head coach Vic Fangio was dismissed on January 8, 2022, after losing to the Kansas City Chiefs.\nWalton\u2013Penner era (2022\u2013present).\nNathaniel Hackett season (2022).\nThe Broncos announced the hiring of Green Bay Packers offensive coordinator Nathaniel Hackett as head coach on January 27, 2022.\nThe Broncos then announced on February 1, 2022, that they were now up for sale and that they would be parting ways with the Bowlen family, the former owners of the franchise.\nHackett's first hire as head coach was Justin Outten as offensive coordinator. He was hired on February 2, 2022.\nOn March 16, 2022, the Broncos traded Drew Lock, Noah Fant, Shelby Harris, Denver's 2022 first-round pick (No. 9), its 2022 second-round pick (No. 40), its 2023 first- and second-round picks, and its 2022 fifth-round pick for Russell Wilson and the Seattle Seahawks' 2022 fourth-round pick.\nOn June 7, 2022, the Broncos announced that the Walton-Penner Family Ownership Group, led by former Walmart chairman Rob Walton, had entered in an agreement to acquire the Denver Broncos for $4.65\u00a0billion. The NFL approved the bid on August 10, 2022, with the Broncos introducing Walton's daughter, Carrie Walton Penner, son-in-law and current Walmart chairman Greg Penner, Starbucks chairwoman Mellody Hobson, former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, and Formula One driver Lewis Hamilton to the ownership group. Walton delegated most of his authority to Penner, who became CEO and operating head of the franchise as well as the public face of the Walton-Penner Group. Penner was designated as the team's controlling owner by the NFL, and represents the Broncos at league meetings.\nOn December 26, with the Broncos sitting at 4\u201311 following a 51\u201314 Christmas Day loss to the Los Angeles Rams, Hackett was fired and replaced by interim head coach Jerry Rosburg. Hackett became the fifth head coach to not finish his first season after Lou Holtz in 1976, Pete McCulley in 1978, Bobby Petrino in 2007, and Urban Meyer in 2021.\nSean Payton years (2023\u2013present).\nOn January 31, 2023, Sean Payton reported that he had accepted the head coaching job for the Denver Broncos, and he was officially hired as head coach for the 2023 season three days later.\nThe season started 1\u20135, including a loss to the Miami Dolphins 70\u201320 in week 3. However, after a loss to the New York Jets, the team rallied back to .500 with wins against the Buffalo Bills and the Kansas City Chiefs; their first victory against the Chiefs since 2015. However, after a loss to the Houston Texans, the Broncos would fall to 6\u20136. The Broncos would lose to the New England Patriots at home on Christmas Eve to fall to 7\u20138. After the loss to the Patriots, reports came out about contract disputes over an injury clause, and Russell Wilson was benched for the final two games of the season. The Broncos finished the 2023 season with a record of 8\u20139 their best record since 2016, third in the AFC West, and missed the playoffs for the eighth consecutive year. The Broncos released Wilson following the end of the season. The Broncos used their 2024 first round pick on Oregon quarterback Bo Nix. Nix was named the Week 1 starter prior to the 2024 season. The Broncos started 0\u20132, before winning 5 of their next 6 and ending up with a record of 10\u20137, their first 10 win season since 2015, and their first winning season since 2016. With a week 18 win against the Chiefs, the Broncos clinched their first playoff spot since winning Super Bowl 50 in 2016. They subsequently lost to the Buffalo Bills in the Wild Card Round, losing 31\u20137 at the Bills.\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nThe Denver Broncos have three AFC West rivals\u2014the Kansas City Chiefs, Las Vegas Raiders and Los Angeles Chargers. All teams, along with the Broncos, were charter members of the American Football League (AFL), with each team placed in the AFL Western Division, forerunner of today's AFC West. The four teams have played each other twice a year for over 60 years, making the entire division one very large rivalry. The Broncos were barely competitive during the AFL years (1960\u201369), going a combined 10\u201349\u20131 against the Chiefs, Chargers and Raiders.\nOakland Raiders.\nHistorically, the most heated divisional matchup for Denver is with the Raiders. The rivalry was ignited in its present form in , when the Broncos advanced to their first Super Bowl by defeating the defending champion Raiders in the 1977 AFC Championship. The rivalry intensified in the mid-1990s, when Mike Shanahan was hired as the Broncos' head coach in 1995. Shanahan coached the Raiders in before being fired four games into the season. The Raiders currently hold a 70\u201354\u20132 series lead over the Broncos, including 1\u20131 in the playoffs.\nKansas City Chiefs.\nThe Broncos have had several memorable matchups with the Kansas City Chiefs, particularly during the years in which John Elway was the Broncos' starting quarterback (1983\u201398). The Broncos defeated the Chiefs at Arrowhead Stadium in the divisional round of the 1997 NFL playoffs, en route to their first Super Bowl victory. The Chiefs currently hold a 69\u201355 series lead over the Broncos, including the aforementioned 1997 divisional playoff game.\nLos Angeles Chargers.\nUnlike their records against the Chiefs and Raiders, the Broncos currently have a winning record against the Los Angeles Chargers, with a 70\u201354\u20131 series lead, including 1\u20130 in the playoffs. The Broncos pulled off one of the largest comebacks in Monday Night Football history, when Peyton Manning led the Broncos from a 24\u20130 halftime deficit to a 35\u201324 win at San Diego's Qualcomm Stadium during the season. The two teams met in the playoffs for the first time on January 12, 2014, at Denver's Sports Authority Field at Mile High, with the Broncos winning 24\u201317.\nHistorical.\nAside from the aforementioned AFC West teams, the Broncos have had intra-conference rivalries over the years with the Cleveland Browns, Pittsburgh Steelers and New England Patriots. The Broncos and Seattle Seahawks were also former AFC West rivals from 1977 to 2001, which Seattle was realigned to the NFC West.\nCleveland Browns.\nThe Broncos had a brief rivalry with the Browns that arose from three AFC championship matches in 1986, 1987 and 1989. In the , quarterback John Elway led \"The Drive\" to secure a tie in the waning moments at Cleveland Municipal Stadium; the Broncos went on to win in 23\u201320 in overtime. One year later, the two teams met again in the at Mile High Stadium. Denver took a 21\u20133 lead, but Browns' quarterback Bernie Kosar threw four touchdown passes to tie the game at 31\u201331 halfway through the 4th quarter. After a long drive, John Elway threw a 20-yard touchdown pass to running back Sammy Winder to give Denver a 38\u201331 lead. Cleveland advanced to Denver's 8-yard line with 1:12 left, but Broncos' safety Jeremiah Castille stripped Browns' running back Earnest Byner of the football at the 2-yard line\u2014a play that has been called \"The Fumble\" by Browns' fans. The Broncos recovered it, gave Cleveland an intentional safety, and went on to win 38\u201333. The two teams met yet again in the at Mile High Stadium, which the Broncos easily won by a score of 37\u201321. The Broncos did not win the Super Bowl after any of the championship games where they defeated the Browns, losing by an aggregate of 136\u201340. As of the 2024 season, the Broncos lead the all-time series 26\u20137.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nAs of the end of the season, the Broncos and Steelers have met in postseason play eight times, tied with five other pairings for the second\u2013most frequent playoff matchups in NFL playoff history. The Broncos currently own a 5\u20133 playoff record vs. the Steelers. Perhaps the most memorable postseason matchup occurred in the , in which the Broncos defeated the Steelers 24\u201321 at Three Rivers Stadium, en route to their first Super Bowl victory. Eight years later, the Steelers returned the favor at INVESCO Field at Mile High, defeating the Broncos 34\u201317 in the , and subsequently won Super Bowl XL. In the Wild Card round of the 2011 playoffs, in a game dubbed \"The 3:16 game\", the Broncos stunned the Steelers 29\u201323 on the first play of overtime, when quarterback Tim Tebow connected with wide receiver Demaryius Thomas on an 80-yard game-winning touchdown pass. The teams met again in the Divisional round of the 2015 playoffs at Denver, where the Broncos defeated the Steelers 23\u201316 on their way to a victory in Super Bowl 50. The Broncos lead the all-time series 20\u201313\u20131.\nNew England Patriots.\nThe Broncos and Patriots met twice annually during the American Football League (AFL) years from 1960 to 1969, and played in the first-ever AFL game on September 9, 1960. Since , the two teams have met frequently during the regular season, including nine consecutive seasons from 1995 to 2003. The teams' first playoff match on January 4, 1987, was John Elway's first career playoff win, while the teams' second playoff match on January 14, 2006, game was the Broncos' first playoff win since Elway's retirement after the 1998 season. The game was also notable for Champ Bailey's 100-yard interception that resulted in a touchdown-saving tackle by Benjamin Watson at the 1-yard line. On October 11, 2009, the two teams met with former Patriots' offensive coordinator, Josh McDaniels as the Broncos' head coach. Both teams wore their AFL 50th anniversary jerseys. The game featured a 98-yard drive in the fourth quarter, with a game-tying touchdown pass from Kyle Orton to Brandon Marshall, followed by an overtime drive led by Orton that resulted in a 41-yard game-winning field goal by Matt Prater. The two teams met in the Divisional round of the 2011 playoffs, with the Patriots blowing out Tim Tebow and the Broncos by a score of 45\u201310. The Broncos' rivalry with the Patriots later intensified when longtime Indianapolis Colts' quarterback Peyton Manning became the Broncos' starting quarterback from 2012 to 2015. Manning and Patriots' quarterback Tom Brady maintained a legendary rivalry from until Manning's retirement after the season. Though Brady dominated Manning in regular season play, winning nine of twelve meetings, Manning won three of five playoff meetings, including the Broncos' 26\u201316 win in the 2013 AFC Championship and the Broncos' 20\u201318 win in the 2015 AFC Championship. As of the 2023 season, the Broncos lead the all-time series 31\u201324.\nSeattle Seahawks.\nThe Broncos had an old rivalry with the Seattle Seahawks, who were members of the AFC West from 1977 to 2001, prior to the Seahawks' move to the NFC West as part of the NFL's re-alignment. During the 25 years in which the Seahawks resided in the AFC West, the Broncos went 32\u201318 against the Seahawks, including a loss at Seattle in the 1983 NFL playoffs. Since 2002, the Broncos have won three of five interconference meetings, and the two teams met in Super Bowl XLVIII on February 2, 2014, with the Seahawks winning by a score of 43\u20138. As of the 2023 season, the Broncos lead the all-time series 35\u201322.\nFacilities.\nFor most of their history, the Denver Broncos played in Mile High Stadium. The AFL Broncos played at the University of Denver's Hilltop Stadium from time to time, including the first victory of an AFL team over an NFL team: The Broncos beat the Detroit Lions on August 5, 1967, in a preseason game. The team has sold out every home game (including post-season games) since the AFL\u2013NFL merger in , with the exception of two replacement games during the strike (but both were sold out before the strike).\nDuring home games, the attendance is announced to the crowd, along with the number of no-shows (the fans subsequently boo the no-shows). The fans are also known to chant \"IN-COM-PLETE!\" every time the visiting team throws an incomplete pass. The stadium's legendary home-field advantage is regarded as one of the best in the NFL, especially during the playoffs. The Broncos had the best home record in pro football over a 32-year span from 1974 to 2006 (191\u201365\u20131). Mile High Stadium was one of the NFL's loudest stadiums, with steel flooring instead of concrete, which may have given the Broncos an advantage over opponents, plus the advantage of altitude conditioning for the Broncos. In , the team moved into then-named Invesco Field at Mile High, built next to the former site of the since-demolished Mile High Stadium. Sportswriter Woody Paige, along with many of Denver's fans, however, often refused to call the stadium by its full name, preferring to use \"Mile High Stadium\" because of its storied history and sentimental import. Additionally, \"The Denver Post\" had an official policy of referring to the stadium as simply \"Mile High Stadium\" in protest, but dropped this policy in 2004.\nPrior to the 2011 season, Englewood-based sporting goods retailer Sports Authority claimed the naming rights of Invesco Field, which became known as Sports Authority Field at Mile High. However, in the summer of 2016, Sports Authority went bankrupt, the stadium was renamed Broncos Stadium at Mile High, and the Broncos sought out a naming rights sponsor until September 2019 when they agreed to rename the stadium Empower Field at Mile High.\nThe altitude has also been attributed as part of the team's home success. The stadium displays multiple references to the stadium's location of above sea level, including a prominent mural just outside the visiting team's locker room. The team training facility, Broncos Park Powered by CommonSpirit (formerly known as the Paul D. Bowlen Memorial Broncos Centre), is a state-of-the-art facility located in Dove Valley. With of property, the facility hosts three full-size fields, a complete weight and training facility, and a cafeteria.\nIn their more than half-century of existence, the Broncos have never been shut out at home, a streak of over 400 games as of the season.\nIn late 2012, the Broncos announced that the stadium would receive $30\u00a0million upgrades including a new video board in the south end zone three times larger than the previous display. The renovations were finished before kickoff of the 2013 season.\nLogos and uniforms.\n1968\u20131996.\nWhen the Broncos debuted in , their original uniforms were said to have drawn as much attention as their play on the field. They featured white and mustard yellow jerseys, contrasting brown helmets, brown pants, and vertically striped socks. Two years later, the team unveiled a new logo featuring a bucking horse and changed their team colors to orange, royal blue and white. The uniform consisted of white pants, orange helmets, and either orange or white jerseys.\nIn , the Broncos debuted a design that became known as \"Orange Crush\". Their logo was redesigned so that the horse was coming out of a \"D\". Additionally, the helmets were changed to royal blue, and the sleeves had thin stripes with other minor modifications added. From 1969 to 1971, and again from 1978 to 1979, the team wore orange pants with their white jerseys. In 1975, the face masks were changed to white from grey.\nThe Broncos wore their white jerseys at home throughout the season, as well as for home games against the San Diego Chargers and Dallas Cowboys, the latter in hopes to bring out the \"blue jersey jinx\" which has followed the Cowboys for decades. (The Broncos won 41\u201320.) The Broncos wore their white jerseys for home games against the Philadelphia Eagles, Los Angeles Raiders and Cincinnati Bengals, but did not wear white at home again for two decades\u00a0\u2014 \"see next section\".\nIn , in honor of the 75th anniversary season of the NFL, the Broncos wore their throwback uniforms for two games\u2014a Week 3 home game against the Raiders and a road game at the Buffalo Bills the following week.\n1997\u20132011.\nThe Broncos radically changed their logo and uniforms in , a design that the team used until 2023. The new logos and uniforms were unveiled on February 4, 1997. Navy blue replaced royal blue on the team's color scheme. The current logo is a profile of a horse's head, with an orange mane and navy blue outlines. The Broncos' popular live animal mascot Thunder was the inspiration to incorporate a horse-head profile as part of the logo on the team's helmets. During a February 4, 1997, press conference introducing the new logo, the team president and the art director for Nike, who were the creators of the new design, described it as \"a powerful horse with a fiery eye and mane.\"\nThe Broncos began wearing navy blue jerseys, replacing their longtime orange jerseys that had been the team's predominant home jersey color since 1962. This new uniform design features a new word mark, numbering font and a streak that runs up and down the sides of both the jerseys and the pants. On the navy blue jerseys, the streak is orange, with an orange collar and white numerals trimmed in orange, while on the road white jerseys, the streak is navy blue, with a thin orange accent strip on both sides, a navy collar and navy numerals trimmed in orange; the helmet facemasks became navy blue. When they debuted, these uniforms were vilified by the press and fans, until the Broncos won their first-ever Super Bowl in the new design that same season. The navy blue jerseys served as the team's primary home jersey until the end of the season\u00a0\u2014 \"see next section\".\nIn , the Broncos introduced an alternate orange jersey that is a mirror image of the aforementioned navy blue jerseys, but with orange and navy trading places. Like the road white jerseys, the white pants with the navy blue streaks running down the sides are worn with this uniform. This jersey was used only once in the 2002 and seasons, and were used twice per season from 2008 to 2011. Mike Shanahan, the team's head coach from 1995 to 2008, was not a big fan of the alternate orange jerseys. The Broncos previously wore orange jerseys as a throwback uniform in a Thanksgiving Day game at the Dallas Cowboys in .\nThe team also introduced navy blue pants in , with orange side streaks to match with the navy blue jerseys. Though they were part of the uniform change in 1997 (in fact, they were worn for a couple of 1997 preseason games) and most players wanted to wear them, the only player who vetoed wearing them was John Elway, thereby delaying their eventual introduction. From 2003 to 2011, these pants were primarily used for select prime-time and late-season home games (excluding the season), and since , are used exclusively with the now-alternate navy blue jerseys\u00a0\u2014 \"see next section\".\nOn November 16, 2003, the Broncos wore their white jerseys at home for the first time since , in a game vs. the San Diego Chargers. This was compensation for a uniform mix-up, after the teams' first meeting at San Diego's Qualcomm Stadium in Week 2 earlier that season, when the Chargers were the team that was supposed to declare their uniform color. The Chargers were planning to wear their white jerseys, but the visiting Broncos came to the stadium in white, and were fined $25,000 by the NFL as a result. When the two teams met at INVESCO Field at Mile High later that season (Week 11), the NFL allowed the visiting Chargers to choose their uniform color in advance, and they chose navy blue, forcing the Broncos to wear their white jerseys at home.\nIn , in honor of their 50th anniversary season as one of the eight original American Football League teams, the Broncos wore their 1960 throwback uniforms (brown helmets, mustard yellow and brown jerseys) for games against two fellow AFL rivals\u2014a Week 5 home game vs. the New England Patriots, as well as the following week at the San Diego Chargers.\n2012\u20132023.\nBeginning in , the orange jerseys that served as the alternate colored jerseys from 2002 to 2011 became the primary home jersey, while the navy blue jerseys that served as the primary home jersey from 1997 to 2011 switched to alternate designation. The change was made due to overwhelming popularity with the fans, who pressured the Broncos to return to orange as the team's primary home jersey color. Since the 2012 uniform change, the team has worn the alternate navy blue jerseys for at least one home game per season, with the exception of , in which the Broncos wore their alternate navy blue uniforms for an October 6, 2013, road game at the Dallas Cowboys, which the Broncos won in a shootout, 51\u201348. The team will either wear the navy blue or the white pants\u00a0\u2013 with the orange side stripes\u00a0\u2013 to match with the alternate navy blue jerseys. The team initially did not wear the white pants with the orange side stripes, until a November 1, 2015, game vs. the Green Bay Packers, in which the Broncos wore said design to match the uniform ensemble that was used during the team's Super Bowl XXXII win over the Packers. On October 30, 2022, the Broncos debuted a new combination of white jerseys and alternate navy blue pants in an NFL London Game at the Jacksonville Jaguars, with mismatched side stripes of navy blue (white jersey) and orange (navy blue pants).\nAs the designated home team in Super Bowl 50, the Broncos\u00a0\u2013 who have a 0\u20134 Super Bowl record when using their standard orange jerseys\u00a0\u2013 chose to wear their white jerseys as the designated \"home\" team.\nIn , the Broncos' unveiled a new Color Rush uniform, which the team wore for a \"Thursday Night\" game at the San Diego Chargers on October 13, 2016. The uniform kit contained the following features: orange pants, which the team wore for the first time since 1979, orange socks and shoes, along with block-style numerals trimmed in navy blue that mirrored the team's 1968\u20131996 uniform style. Due to the NFL's one-helmet rule implemented in 2013, the helmets remained the same, with the team temporarily replacing the modern primary logo with the throwback \"D-horse\" logo. The same uniform was used for a Thursday night game against the Indianapolis Colts during the season and again during a 2018 game against the Pittsburgh Steelers. In a Week 2 game vs. the Washington Commanders in 2023, the Broncos wore their white jerseys at home for the first time since 2003, to honor the 25th anniversary of the Super Bowl XXXIII team. In 2023, the Color Rush uniforms were paired with a white alternate helmet, again using the modernized \"D-horse\" logo, and were discontinued at the end of that season, with the arrival of a new uniform kit in 2024\u2014\"see next section\".\n2024\u2013present.\nOn April 22, 2024, the Broncos unveiled a simpler uniform design, eliminating the mismatched jersey and pant stripes that characterized their 1997 redesign and reverting to a more vintage block number style and letters inspired by the signage of Colorado's national parks. The set consists of a primary home orange and road white uniform, and an alternate navy blue uniform; all uniforms could be worn with either orange, white or navy blue pants. The striping on the uniform is a nod to the Rocky Mountains. The primary helmets remain navy blue while the alternate remains white; both feature the current Broncos logo with triangle clusters on top to represent Denver's elevation. The Broncos also unveiled a throwback 1977 \"Orange Crush\" uniform along with the royal blue \"D-horse\" helmet; this is due to the NFL allowing teams with new uniforms to unveil a second alternate helmet this season.\nStatistics and records.\nSeason-by-season records.\nSince their first season in 1960, the Broncos have an all-time record of 518\u2013472\u201310 as of the 2024 season.\nPlayers of note.\nRetired numbers.\n\u2020 Note: No. 18 was re-issued for Peyton Manning after Tripucka gave his approval; it was used by Manning from the 2012 season until his retirement after the 2015 season. Manning's name was added to the retired number's banner as an honorable mention.\nRing of Fame.\nThe Broncos have a Ring of Fame on the Level 5 facade of Empower Field at Mile High, which honors the following:\n50th Anniversary Team.\nThe Denver Broncos announced the club's 50th anniversary team on September 15, 2009. The anniversary team was voted on by users at DenverBroncos.com from June 6 to September 4, 2009.\nSuper Bowl MVPs.\nThe Broncos have had three players win Super Bowl MVP in franchise history.\nStaff and head coaches.\nHead coaches.\nThe Broncos have had 20 head coaches serve in the capacity in franchise history.\nRadio and television.\nThe Broncos' flagship radio station is currently KOA, 850AM, a 50,000-watt station owned by iHeartMedia. Dave Logan is the play-by-play announcer, with former Broncos' wide receiver Ed McCaffrey serving as the color commentator beginning in 2012, replacing Brian Griese. Ed McCaffrey was replaced by Rick Lewis. Until 2010, preseason games not selected for airing on national television were shown on KCNC, channel 4, which is a CBS owned-and-operated station, as well as other CBS affiliates around the Rocky Mountain region. On May 26, 2011, the Broncos announced that KUSA channel 9, an NBC affiliate also known as 9NEWS in the Rocky Mountain region, will be the team's new television partner for preseason games.\nIn 2011, the Broncos began a partnership with KJMN, 92.1 FM, a leading Spanish language radio station owned by Entravision Communications (EVC). The partnership also includes broadcasting rights for a half-hour weekly TV show on KCEC, the local Univision affiliate operated by Entravision Communications.\nReferences.\nNotes\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "8123", "revid": "5128741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8123", "title": "D", "text": "D, or d, is the fourth letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of other western European languages and others worldwide. Its name in English is \"dee\" (pronounced ), plural \"dees\".\nHistory.\nThe Semitic letter D\u0101leth may have developed from the logogram for a fish or a door. There are many different Egyptian hieroglyphs that might have inspired this. In Semitic, Ancient Greek and Latin, the letter represented ; in the Etruscan alphabet the letter was archaic but still retained. The equivalent Greek letter is delta, \u0394.\nThe minuscule (lower-case) form of 'd' consists of a lower-story left bowl and a stem ascender. It most likely developed by gradual variations on the majuscule (capital) form 'D', and is now composed as a stem with a full lobe to the right. In handwriting, it was common to start the arc to the left of the vertical stroke, resulting in a serif at the top of the arc. This serif was extended while the rest of the letter was reduced, resulting in an angled stroke and loop. The angled stroke slowly developed into a vertical stroke.\nUse in writing systems.\nEnglish.\nIn English, generally represents the voiced alveolar plosive .\nThe letter is the tenth most frequently used in the English language.\nOther languages.\nIn most languages that use the Latin alphabet, generally represents the voiced alveolar or voiced dental plosive .\nIn the Vietnamese alphabet, it represents the sound in northern dialects or in southern dialects. In Fijian, it represents a prenasalized stop .\nIn some languages where voiceless unaspirated stops contrast with voiceless aspirated stops, represents an unaspirated , while represents an aspirated . Examples of such languages include Icelandic, Scottish Gaelic, Navajo and the pinyin transliteration of Mandarin.\nOther systems.\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet, represents the voiced alveolar plosive .\nOther representations.\nComputing.\nThe Latin letters and have Unicode encodings and . These are the same code points as those used in ASCII and ISO 8859. There are also precomposed character encodings for and with diacritics, for most of those listed above; the remainder are produced using combining diacritics.\nVariant forms of the letter have unique code points for specialist use: the alphanumeric symbols set in mathematics and science, plosive sounds in linguistics and halfwidth and fullwidth forms for legacy CJK font compatibility.\nOther.\nIn British Sign Language (BSL), the letter 'd' is indicated by signing with the right hand held with the index and thumb extended and slightly curved, and the tip of the thumb and finger held against the extended index of the left hand."}
{"id": "8124", "revid": "4711431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8124", "title": "Delta (letter)", "text": "Delta (; uppercase \u0394, lowercase \u03b4; , \"d\u00e9lta\", ) is the fourth letter of the Greek alphabet. In the system of Greek numerals, it has a value of four. It was derived from the Phoenician letter dalet \ud802\udd03. Letters that come from delta include the Latin D and the Cyrillic \u0414.\nA river delta (originally, the delta of the Nile River) is named so because its shape approximates the triangular uppercase letter delta. Contrary to a popular legend, this use of the word \"delta\" was not coined by Herodotus.\nPronunciation.\nIn Ancient Greek, delta represented a voiced dental plosive . In Modern Greek, it represents a voiced dental fricative , like the \"\"th\" in \"that\" or \"this\"\" (while in foreign words is instead commonly transcribed as \u03bd\u03c4). Delta is romanized as \"d\" or \"dh\".\nUppercase.\nThe uppercase letter \u0394 is used to denote:\nLowercase.\nThe lowercase letter \u03b4 (or \ud835\udeff) can be used to denote:"}
{"id": "8125", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8125", "title": "Digamma", "text": "Digamma or wau (uppercase: \u03dc, lowercase: \u03dd, numeral: \u03db) is an archaic letter of the Greek alphabet. It originally stood for the sound but it has remained in use principally as a Greek numeral for 6. Whereas it was originally called \"waw\" or \"wau\", its most common appellation in classical Greek is \"digamma\"; as a numeral, it was called \"epis\u0113mon\" during the Byzantine era and is now known as \"stigma\" after the Byzantine ligature combining \u03c3-\u03c4 as \u03db.\nDigamma or wau was part of the original archaic Greek alphabet as initially adopted from Phoenician. Like its model, Phoenician waw, it represented the voiced labial-velar approximant and stood in the 6th position in the alphabet between epsilon and zeta. It is the consonantal doublet of the vowel letter upsilon (), which was also derived from waw but was placed near the end of the Greek alphabet. Digamma or wau is in turn the ancestor of the Latin letter F. As an alphabetic letter, it is attested in archaic and dialectal ancient Greek inscriptions until the classical period.\nThe shape of the letter went through a development from through , , , to or , which at that point was conflated with the \u03c3-\u03c4 ligature . In modern print, a distinction is made between the letter in its original alphabetic role as a consonant sign, which is rendered as \"\u03dc\" or its modern lowercase variant \"\u03dd\", and the numeric symbol, which is represented by \"\u03db\". In modern Greek, this is often replaced by the digraph .\nGreek w.\nMycenaean Greek.\nThe sound existed in Mycenean Greek, as attested in Linear B and archaic Greek inscriptions using digamma. It is also confirmed by the Hittite name of Troy, \"Wilusa\", corresponding to the Greek name *\"Wilion\", classical \"Ilion\" (Ilium).\nClassical Greek.\nThe sound was lost at various times in various dialects, mostly before the classical period.\nIn Ionic, had probably disappeared before Homer's epics were written down (7th century BC), but its former presence can be detected in many cases because its omission left the meter defective. For example, the word (\"(tribal) king, lord, (military) leader\"), found in the Iliad, would have originally been (and is attested in this form in Mycenaean Greek), and the word (\"wine\"), are sometimes used in the meter where a word starting with a consonant would be expected. Further evidence coupled with cognate-analysis shows that was earlier (compare Cretan Doric and Latin , which is the origin of English \"wine\"). There have been editions of the Homeric epics where the wau was re-added, particularly in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, but these have largely fallen out of favour.\nAeolian was the dialect that kept the sound longest. In discussions by ancient Greek grammarians of the Hellenistic era, the letter is therefore often described as a characteristic Aeolian feature.\nLoanwords that entered Greek before the loss of lost that sound when Greek did. For instance, Oscan ('land of the male calves', compare 'yearling, male calf') gave rise to the Greek word . The Adriatic tribe of the Veneti was called in . In loanwords that entered the Greek language after the drop of , the phoneme was once again registered, compare for example the spelling of for \"vates\".\nPamphylian digamma.\nIn some local (\"epichoric\") alphabets, a variant glyph of the letter digamma existed that resembled modern Cyrillic \u0418. In one local alphabet, that of Pamphylia, this variant form existed side by side with standard digamma as two distinct letters. It has been surmised that in this dialect the sound may have changed to labiodental in some environments. The F-shaped letter may have stood for the new sound, while the special \u0418-shaped form signified those positions where the old sound was preserved.\nNumeral.\nDigamma/wau remained in use in the system of Greek numerals attributed to Miletus, where it stood for the number 6, reflecting its original place in the sequence of the alphabet. It was one of three letters that were kept in this way in addition to the 24 letters of the classical alphabet, the other two being koppa (\u03d9) for 90, and sampi (\u03e1) for 900. During their history in handwriting in late antiquity and the Byzantine era, all three of these symbols underwent several changes in shape, with digamma ultimately taking the form of \"\u03db\".\nIt has remained in use as a numeral in Greek to the present day, in contexts comparable to those where Latin numerals would be used in English, for instance in regnal numbers of monarchs or in enumerating chapters in a book, although in practice the letter sequence \u03a3\u03a4\u0384 is much more common.\nGlyph development.\nEpigraphy.\nDigamma was derived from Phoenician waw, which was shaped roughly like a Y (). Of the two Greek reflexes of waw, digamma retained the alphabetic position, but had its shape modified to , while the upsilon retained the original shape but was placed in a new alphabetic position. Early Crete had an archaic form of digamma somewhat closer to the original Phoenician, , or a variant with the stem bent sidewards (). The shape , during the archaic period, underwent a development parallel to that of epsilon (which changed from to \"E\", with the arms becoming orthogonal and the lower end of the stem being shed off). For digamma, this led to the two main variants of classical \"F\" and square .\nThe latter of these two shapes became dominant when used as a numeral, with \"F\" only very rarely employed in this function. However, in Athens, both of these were avoided in favour of a number of alternative numeral shapes (, , , , , ).\nEarly handwriting.\nIn cursive handwriting, the square-C form developed further into a rounded form resembling a \"C\" (found in papyrus manuscripts as , on coins sometimes as ). It then developed a downward tail at the end (, ) and finally adopted a shape like a Latin \"s\" () These cursive forms are also found in stone inscriptions in late antiquity.\nConflation with the \u03c3\u03c4 ligature.\nIn the ninth and tenth centuries, the cursive shape digamma was visually conflated with a ligature of sigma (in its historical \"lunate\" form) and tau ( + = , ). The \u03c3\u03c4-ligature had become common in minuscule handwriting from the 9th century onwards. Both closed () and open () forms were subsequently used without distinction both for the ligature and for the numeral. The ligature took on the name of \"\"stigma\" or \"sti\"\", and the name stigma is today applied to it both in its textual and in the numeral function. The association between its two functions as a numeral and as a sign for \"st\" became so strong that in modern typographic practice in Greece, whenever the \u03db\u02b9 sign itself is not available, the letter sequences \u03c3\u03c4\u02b9 or \u03a3\u03a4\u02b9 are used instead for the number 6.\nTypography.\nIn western typesetting during the modern era, the numeral symbol was routinely represented by the same character as the \"stigma\" ligature (\u03db). In normal text, this ligature together with numerous others continued to be used widely until the early nineteenth century, following the style of earlier minuscule handwriting, but ligatures then gradually dropped out of use. The \"stigma\" ligature was among those that survived longest, but it too became obsolete in print after the mid-19th century. Today it is used only to represent the numeric digamma, and never to represent the sequence \u03c3\u03c4 in text.\nAlong with the other special numeric symbols koppa and sampi, numeric digamma/stigma normally has no distinction between uppercase and lowercase forms, (while other alphabetic letters can be used as numerals in both cases). Distinct uppercase versions were occasionally used in the 19th century. Several different shapes of uppercase stigma can be found, with the lower end either styled as a small curved S-like hook (), or as a straight stem, the latter either with a serif () or without one (). An alternative uppercase stylization in some twentieth-century fonts is , visually a ligature of Roman-style uppercase C and T.\nThe characters used for numeric digamma/stigma are distinguished in modern print from the character used to represent the ancient alphabetic digamma, the letter for the [w] sound. This is rendered in print by a Latin \"F\", or sometimes a variant of it specially designed to fit in typographically with Greek (\u03dc). It has a modern lowercase form (\u03dd) that typically differs from Latin \"f\" by having two parallel horizontal strokes like the uppercase character, with the vertical stem often being somewhat slanted to the right or curved, and usually descending below the baseline. This character is used in Greek epigraphy to transcribe the text of ancient inscriptions that contain \"\u03dc\", and in linguistics and historical grammar when describing reconstructed proto-forms of Greek words that contained the sound .\nGlyph confusion.\nThroughout much of its history, the shape of digamma/stigma has often been very similar to that of other symbols, with which it can easily be confused. In ancient papyri, the cursive C-shaped form of numeric digamma is often indistinguishable from the C-shaped (\"lunate\") form that was then the common form of sigma. The similarity is still found today, since both the modern stigma (\u03db) and modern final sigma (\u03c2) look identical or almost identical in most fonts; both are historically continuations of their ancient C-shaped forms with the addition of the same downward flourish. If the two characters are distinguished in print, the top loop of stigma tends to be somewhat larger and to extend farther to the right than that of final sigma. The two characters are, however, always distinguishable from the context in modern usage, both in numeric notation and in text: the final form of sigma never occurs in numerals (the number 200 being always written with the medial sigma, \u03c3), and in normal Greek text the sequence \"\u03c3\u03c4\" can never occur word-finally.\nThe medieval s-like shape of digamma () has the same shape as a contemporary abbreviation for (\"and\").\nYet another case of glyph confusion exists in the printed uppercase forms, this time between stigma and the other numeral, koppa (90). In ancient and medieval handwriting, koppa developed from through , , to . The uppercase forms and can represent either koppa or stigma. Frequent confusion between these two values in contemporary printing was already noted by some commentators in the eighteenth century. The ambiguity continues in modern fonts, many of which continue to have glyph similar to for either koppa or stigma.\nNames.\nThe symbol has been called by a variety of different names, referring either to its alphabetic or its numeral function or both.\nWau.\n\"Wau\" (variously rendered as \"vau\", \"waw\" or similarly in English) is the original name of the alphabetic letter for in ancient Greek. It is often cited in its reconstructed acrophonic spelling \"\". This form itself is not historically attested in Greek inscriptions, but the existence of the name can be inferred from descriptions by contemporary Latin grammarians, who render it as \"vau\". In later Greek, where both the letter and the sound it represented had become inaccessible, the name is rendered as or . In the 19th century, \"vau\" in English was a common name for the symbol \u03db in its numerical function, used by authors who distinguished it both from the alphabetic \"digamma\" and from \u03db as a \u03c3\u03c4 ligature.\nDigamma.\nThe name \"digamma\" was used in ancient Greek and is the most common name for the letter in its alphabetic function today. It literally means \"double gamma\" and is descriptive of the original letter's shape, which looked like a \"\u0393\" (gamma) placed on top of another.\nEpisemon.\nThe name \"epis\u0113mon\" was used for the numeral symbol during the Byzantine era and is still sometimes used today, either as a name specifically for digamma/stigma, or as a generic term for the whole group of extra-alphabetic numeral signs (digamma, koppa and sampi). The Greek word \"\", from (\"epi-\", \"on\") and (\"s\u0113ma\", \"sign\"), literally means \"a distinguishing mark\", \"a badge\", but is also the neuter form of the related adjective \"\" (\"distinguished\", \"remarkable\"). This word was connected to the number \"six\" through early Christian mystical numerology. According to an account of the teachings of the heretic Marcus given by the church father Irenaeus, the number six was regarded as a symbol of Christ, and was hence called \"\" (\"the outstanding number\"); likewise, the name (\"Jesus\"), having six letters, was \"\" (\"the outstanding name\"), and so on. The sixth-century treatise \"About the Mystery of the Letters\", which also links the six to Christ, calls the number sign \"to Epis\u0113mon\" throughout. The same name is still found in a fifteenth-century arithmetical manual by the Greek mathematician Nikolaos Rabdas. It is also found in a number of western European accounts of the Greek alphabet written in Latin during the early Middle Ages. One of them is the work \"De loquela per gestum digitorum\", a didactic text about arithmetics attributed to the Venerable Bede, where the three Greek numerals for 6, 90 and 900 are called \"episimon\", \"cophe\" and \"enneacosis\" respectively. From Beda, the term was adopted by the seventeenth century humanist Joseph Justus Scaliger. However, misinterpreting Beda's reference, Scaliger applied the term \"epis\u0113mon\" not as a name proper for digamma/6 alone, but as a cover term for all three numeral letters. From Scaliger, the term found its way into modern academic usage in this new meaning, of referring to complementary numeral symbols standing outside the alphabetic sequence proper, in Greek and other similar scripts.\nGabex or Gamex.\nIn one remark in the context of a biblical commentary, the 4th century scholar Ammonius of Alexandria is reported to have mentioned that the numeral symbol for 6 was called \"gabex\" by his contemporaries. The same reference in Ammonius has alternatively been read as \"gam(m)ex\" by some modern authors. Ammonius as well as later theologians discuss the symbol in the context of explaining the apparent contradiction and variant readings between the gospels in assigning the death of Jesus either to the \"third hour\" or \"sixth hour\", arguing that the one numeral symbol could easily have been substituted for the other through a scribal error.\nStigma.\nThe name \"stigma\" () was originally a common Greek noun meaning \"a mark, dot, puncture\" or generally \"a sign\", from the verb \u03c3\u03c4\u03af\u03b6\u03c9 (\"to puncture\"). It had an earlier writing-related special meaning, being the name for a dot as a punctuation mark, used for instance to mark shortness of a syllable in the notation of rhythm. It was then co-opted as a name specifically for the \u03c3\u03c4 ligature, evidently because of the acrophonic value of its initial \"st-\" as well as the analogy with the name of sigma. Other names coined according to the same analogical principle are \"sti\" or \"stau\"."}
{"id": "8126", "revid": "2428506", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8126", "title": "Dose", "text": "Dose or Dosage may refer to:"}
{"id": "8127", "revid": "30515115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8127", "title": "Dilbert", "text": "Dilbert is an American comic strip written and illustrated by Scott Adams, first published on April 16, 1989. It is known for its satirical office humor about a white-collar, micromanaged office with engineer Dilbert as the title character. It has led to dozens of books, an animated television series, a video game, and hundreds of themed merchandise items. \"Dilbert Future\" and \"The Joy of Work\" are among the best-selling books in the series. In 1997, Adams received the National Cartoonists Society Reuben Award and the Newspaper Comic Strip Award for his work. \"Dilbert\" appears online and as of 2013 was published daily in 2,000 newspapers in 65 countries and 25 languages.\nIn 2023, \"Dilbert\" was dropped by numerous independent newspapers as well as its distributor, Andrews McMeel Syndication (which owns GoComics, from where the comic was also removed), after Adams published a video where he called Black Americans that disagreed with \"It's okay to be white\" a \"hate group\" and said white Americans should \"get the hell away from\" them. The video was widely described by sources such as \"The Economist\" and \"Reuters\" as containing \"racist comments\" and being a \"racist rant\". Adams stated that he disavows racism. The following month, Adams relaunched the strip as a webcomic on Locals under the name \"Daily Dilbert Reborn\".\nPublication history.\n\"Dilbert\" began syndication by United Feature Syndicate (a division of United Media) in April 1989.\nOn June 3, 2010, United Media sold its licensing arm, along with the rights to \"Dilbert\", to Iconix Brand Group. This led to \"Dilbert\" leaving United Media. In late December 2010, it was announced that Dilbert would move to Universal Uclick (a division of Andrews McMeel Universal, known as Andrews McMeel Syndication) beginning in June 2011, where it remained until 2023.\nIn September 2022, Lee Enterprises ceased running the strip in what Scott Adams reported as 77 newspapers as the publisher declined to include the strip in a new comics page that was instituted throughout the company. He said that he had received complaints about Dilbert mocking the environmental, social, and corporate governance movement, but that he was not sure if that was the reason for the cancellation. The \"San Francisco Chronicle\", owned by Hearst Media dropped \"Dilbert\" in October 2022 saying the move came after strips joked that reparations for slavery could be claimed by underperforming office workers.\nIn February 2023, hundreds of newspapers owned by media conglomerates including Andrews McMeel Syndication dropped the comic in response to a YouTube video published by Adams on February 22, 2023, during which he advised white people to \"get the hell away from black people\" following publication of a Rasmussen Reports poll which Adams said showed that African-American people collectively form a \"hate group\". The poll found that 53% of African-Americans agree with the statement \"It's okay to be White\", while 26% disagreed, and 21% responded they were \"not sure\". Gannett, including its USA Today network (including the \"Detroit Free Press,\" \"The Indianapolis Star,\" \"The Cincinnati Enquirer\", and \"The Arizona Republic)\" also dropped the strip following Adams's comments. Such major newspapers as \"The Washington Post\", the \"Los Angeles Times\", \"The Seattle Times\", \"The Atlanta Journal-Constitution\", and \"The Plain Dealer\" all ceased to syndicate Dilbert and published editorials denouncing Adams. The \"Los Angeles Times\" also stated it had removed four \"Dilbert\" cartoons from its pages in the preceding nine months when they did not meet the newspaper's standards. In response, Adams announced that on March 16, 2023, he would launch \"Dilbert Reborn\" on the subscription website Locals, describing it as \"spicier than the original\".\nThemes.\nThe comic strip originally revolved around the character Dilbert and his \"pet\" dog Dogbert in their home. Many early plots revolved around Dilbert's engineer nature, bizarre inventions, and megalomaniacal ambitions. Later, the setting of most of the strips was changed to Dilbert's workplace and the strip began to satirize technology, workplace, and company issues. The strip's popular success is attributable to its workplace setting and themes, which are familiar to a large and appreciative audience. Adams said that switching the setting from Dilbert's home to his office was \"when the strip really started to take off\". The workplace location is Silicon Valley.\n\"Dilbert\" portrays corporate culture as a Kafkaesque world of bureaucracy for its own sake, where office politics preclude productivity, employees' skills and efforts are not rewarded, and busy work is praised. Much of the humor involves characters making ridiculous decisions in reaction to mismanagement.\nCharacters.\nDilbert.\nThe strip's central character, Dilbert is depicted as a technically minded engineer. Until October 2014, he was usually depicted wearing a white dress shirt, black trousers and a red-and-black striped tie that inexplicably curved upward. After October 13, 2014, his standard apparel changed to a red polo shirt with a name badge on a lanyard around his neck. He is a skilled engineer but has poor social and romantic lives.\nPointy-Haired Boss (PHB).\nDilbert's boss, known only as the Pointy-Haired Boss, is the unnamed, oblivious manager of the engineering division of Dilbert's company. Adams states that he never named him so that people can imagine him to be their boss. In earlier strips he was depicted as a stereotypical late-middle-aged balding middle manager with jowls; it was not until later that he developed his signature pointy hair and the jowls disappeared. He is hopelessly incompetent at management, and he often tries to compensate for his lack of skills with countless group therapy sessions and business strategies that rarely bear fruit. He does not understand technical issues but always tries to disguise this ineptitude, usually by using buzzwords he also does not understand. The Boss treats his employees alternately with enthusiasm or neglect; he often uses them to his own ends regardless of the consequences to them. Adams himself wrote that \"he's not sadistic, just uncaring\". His level of intelligence varies from near-vegetative to perceptive and clever, depending on the strip's comic needs. His utter lack of consistent business ethics, however, is perfectly consistent. His brother is a demon named \"Phil, the Prince of Insufficient Light\", and according to Adams, the pointy hair is intended to remind one of devil horns.\nWally.\nOne of the longest-serving engineers, Wally was originally a worker trying to get fired to obtain a large severance package. He hates work and avoids it whenever he can. He often carries a cup of coffee, calmly sipping from it even in the midst of chaos or office-shaking revelations. Wally is extremely cynical. He is even more socially inept than Dilbert (though far less self-aware of the fact), and references to his lack of personal hygiene are not uncommon. Like the Pointy-Haired Boss, Wally is utterly lacking in ethics and will take advantage of any situation to maximize his personal gain while doing the least possible amount of honest work. Until the change to \"business dorky\" wear of a polo shirt, Wally was invariably portrayed wearing a short sleeved dress shirt and tie. Adams has stated that Wally was based on a Pacific Bell coworker of his who was interested in a generous employee buy-out program\u2014for the company's worst employees. This had the effect of causing this man\u2014whom Adams describes as \"one of the more brilliant people I've met\"\u2014to work hard at being incompetent, rude, and generally poor at his job to qualify for the buy-out program. Adams has said that this inspired the basic laziness and amorality of Wally's character. Despite these personality traits, Wally is accepted as part of Dilbert, Ted, Alice, and Asok's clique. Although his relationship with Alice is often antagonistic and Dilbert occasionally denies being his friend, their actions show at least a certain acceptance of him. For Asok, Wally serves as something of a guru of counterintuitive \"wisdom\". Wally exasperates Dilbert at times but is also sometimes the only other co-worker who understands Dilbert's frustrations with company idiocy and bureaucracy. While Dilbert rages at the dysfunction of the policies of the company, Wally has learned to use the dysfunction to cloak, even justify, his laziness.\nAlice.\nOne of the more competent and highest paid engineers. She is often frustrated at work because she does not get proper recognition, which she believes is because she is female. She has a quick, often violent temper, sometimes putting her \"Fist of Death\" to use, even with the Pointy-haired Boss. Alice is based on a woman that Adams worked with named Anita, who is described as sharing Alice's \"pink suit, fluffy hair, technical proficiency, coffee obsession, and take-no-crap attitude.\"\nDogbert.\nDilbert's anthropomorphic pet dog is the smartest dog on Earth. Dogbert is a megalomaniac intellectual dog, planning to one day conquer the world. He once succeeded, but became bored with the ensuing peace, and quit. Often seen in high-ranking consultant or technical support jobs, he constantly abuses his power and fools the management of Dilbert's company, though considering the intelligence of the company's management in general and Dilbert's boss in particular, this is not very hard to do. He also enjoys pulling scams on unsuspecting and usually dull customers to steal their money. However, despite Dogbert's cynical exterior, he has been known to pull his master out of some tight jams. Dogbert's nature as a pet was more emphasized during the earlier years of the strip; as the strip progressed, references to his acting like a dog became less common, although he still wags his tail when he perpetrates his scams. When an older Dilbert arrives while time-traveling from the future, he refers to Dogbert as \"majesty\", indicating that Dogbert will one day indeed rule the world again, and make worshipping him retroactive so he could boss around time travelers.\nCatbert.\nCatbert is the \"evil director of human resources\" in the \"Dilbert\" comic strip. He was supposed to be a one-time character but resonated with readers so well that Adams brought him back as the HR director. Catbert's origins with the company are that he was hired by Dogbert. Dogbert hired him because he wanted an H.R. Director that appeared cute while secretly downsizing employees.\nAsok.\nA young intern, Asok works very hard but does not always get proper recognition. He is intensely intelligent but naive about corporate life; the shattering of his optimistic illusions becomes frequent comic fodder. He is Indian and graduated from the Indian Institutes of Technology (IIT). The other workers, especially the Boss, often unwittingly trample on his cultural beliefs. On the occasions when Asok mentions this, he is normally ignored. His test scores (a perfect 1600 on the old SAT) and his IQ of 240 show that he is the smartest member of the engineering team. Nonetheless, he is often called upon by the Boss to do odd jobs, and in meetings his ideas are usually left hanging. He is also seen regularly at the lunch table with Wally and Dilbert, experiencing jarring realizations of the nature of corporate life. There are a few jokes about his psychic powers, which he learned at the IIT. Yet despite his intelligence, ethics, and mystical powers, Asok sometimes takes advice from Wally in the arts of laziness, and from Dilbert in surviving the office. As of February 7, 2014, Asok is officially gay, which never affects any storylines but merely commemorates a decision by the Indian Supreme Court to uphold a British-era anti-gay law, a decision which was overturned on September 6, 2018.\nThe CEO.\nThe CEO of the company is bald and has an extremely tall, somewhat pointed cranium. He is only slightly less clueless than the Pointy-Haired Boss.\nTed.\nAn engineer who is often seen hanging out with Wally. He is referenced by name more often in older comics, but he is still seen occasionally. He has been accepted into Dilbert's clique. He has been fired and killed numerous times (for example, being pushed down a flight of stairs and becoming possessed), in which case a new Ted is apparently hired. In addition to this, he is often promoted and given benefits over the other employees. Ted has a wife and children who are referenced multiple times and seen on at least one occasion. Adams refers to him as \"Ted the Generic Guy\", because whenever he needs to fire or kill someone he uses Ted, but slowly over time Ted has become his own character.\nTina.\nAlso known as Tina the Tech Writer. She has a less forceful personality than Alice and often seems to get taken advantage of by the other employees. Her job of writing technical directions for her company's software cannot be an easy one as none of their products work as designed.\nCarol.\nCarol is the long-suffering secretary (she prefers the title Executive Assistant) to the Pointy-haired Boss. Her hair style is a much smaller triangle than that of Alice. She hates her job, but once told Dilbert that spending time with her family of a husband and two children is like fighting porcupines in a salt mine, although when the job gets to be too much she is glad to get back to them.\nDave.\nIntroduced in 2022, Dave is the strip's first black character, although he identifies as white, messing up the company's ESG and diversity scores, possibly deliberately, as it is not clear whether he is serious or not. Dave has proved controversial, with at least one newspaper chain deciding not to run the strips featuring him.\nElbonia.\nElbonia is a fictional non-specific under-developed country used when Adams wants \"to involve a foreign country without hurting overseas sales\". He says \"People think I have some specific country in mind when I write about Elbonia, but I don't. It represents the view that Americans have of any country that doesn't have cable television\u2014we think they all wear fur hats and wallow around waist-deep in mud\". The entire country wears the same clothing and hats, and all men and women\nhave full beards. They are occasionally bitter towards their wealthier western neighbors, but are quite happy to trade with them. The whole country is covered in mud, and has limited technology.\nElbonia is located somewhere in the former Eastern Bloc: a strip dated April 2, 1990, refers to the \"Tiny East European country of Elbonia.\" It is an extremely poor, fourth-world country that \"has abandoned Communism\". The national bird of Elbonia is the Frisbee.\nPhil.\nThe Pointy-Haired Boss's brother Phil. His full title is Phil, the Prince of Insufficient Light &amp; Supreme Ruler of Heck. His job, one step down from Satan, is to punish those who commit minor sins. His 'Pitch-Spoon' is feared by those who do. He is known to 'Darn to Heck' people who do things like using cell phones in the bathroom, steal office supplies, or those who simply do something annoying. In one strip, it was mentioned that being in Heck is not as bad as being in a cubicle.\nRatbert.\nRatbert is an escaped lab rat who lives in Dilbert's house. Ratbert was not originally intended to be a regular, instead being part of a series of strips featuring a lab scientist's cruel experiments. The character is often seen in strips set in Dilbert's home and is frequently a foil / co-conspirator in Dogbert's machinations.\nLegacy.\nThe popularity of the comic strip within the corporate sector led to the Dilbert character being used in many business magazines and publications, including several appearances on the cover of \"Fortune Magazine\". Many newspapers ran the comic in their business section rather than in the regular comics section\u2014similar to the way that \"Doonesbury\" is often featured in the editorial section, due to its pointed commentary.\nCriticism and parody.\nMedia analyst Norman Solomon and cartoonist Tom Tomorrow said Adams's caricatures of corporate culture seem to project empathy for white-collar workers, but the satire ultimately plays into the hands of upper corporate management itself. Solomon describes the characters of \"Dilbert\" as dysfunctional time-wasters, none of whom occupies a position higher than middle management, and whose inefficiencies detract from corporate values such as productivity and growth. Dilbert and his coworkers often find themselves baffled or victimized by the whims of managerial behavior, but they never seem to question it openly. Solomon cites the Xerox corporation's use of \"Dilbert\" strips and characters in internally distributed pamphlets:\nAdams responded in the February 2, 1998, strip and in his book \"The Joy of Work\" with a sarcastic reiteration.\nIn 1997, Tom Vanderbilt wrote in a similar vein in \"The Baffler\" magazine:\nIn 1998, Bill Griffith, creator of \"Zippy the Pinhead\", chided \"Dilbert\" for crude drawings and simplistic humor. He wrote,\nAdams responded by creating two comic strips called \"Pippy the Ziphead\", in which Dogbert creates a comic by \"cramming as much artwork in [it] as possible so no one will notice there's only one joke\", and it's \"on the reader\". Dilbert says that the strip is \"nothing but a clown with a small head who says random things\", and Dogbert responds that he is \"maintaining [his] artistic integrity by creating a comic that no one will enjoy.\" In September of the same year, Griffith mocked Adams's \"Pippy the Ziphead\" with a strip of the same name drawn in a simplistic, stiff, \"Dilbert\"-like style set in an office setting and featuring the characters Zippy and Griffy retorting, \"I sense a joke was delivered.\" \"Yes. It was. My one joke. Ha.\"\nIn the late 1990s, amateur cartoonist Karl H\u00f6rnell began submitting a comic strip to \"Savage Dragon\" creator Erik Larsen that parodied both \"Dilbert\" and the Image Comics series \"The Savage Dragon\". This became a regular feature in the \"Savage Dragon\" comic book, titled \"The Savage Dragonbert and Hitler's Brainbert\"\u2014\"Hitler's Brainbert\" being a loose parody of both Dogbert and the \"Savage Dragon\" villain identified as Adolf Hitler's disembodied, superpowered brain. The strip began as a specific parody of the comic book itself, set loosely within the office structure of \"Dilbert\", with H\u00f6rnell doing an emulation of Adams's cartooning style.\nLanguage.\nAdams has invited readers to invent words that have become popular among fans in describing their own office environments, such as \"induhvidual\". This term is based on the American English slang expression \"duh!\" The conscious misspelling of \"individual\" as \"induhvidual\" is a pejorative term for people who are not in Dogbert's New Ruling Class (DNRC). Its coining is explained in \"Dilbert Newsletter\" #6. The strip has also popularized the usage of the terms \"cow-orker\" and \"PHB\".\nManagement.\nIn 1997, Adams masqueraded as a management consultant to Logitech executives (as Ray Mebert), with the cooperation of the company's vice-chairman. He acted in much the way that he portrays management consultants in the comic strip, with an arrogant manner and bizarre suggestions, such as comparing mission statements to broccoli soup. He convinced the executives to change their existing mission statement for their New Ventures Group from \"provide Logitech with profitable growth and related new business areas\" to \"scout profitable growth opportunities in relationships, both internally and externally, in emerging, mission-inclusive markets, and explore new paradigms and then filter and communicate and evangelize the findings\".\nAdams has worked with companies to develop \"dream\" products for Dilbert and company. In 2001, he collaborated with design company IDEO to come up with the \"perfect cubicle\", since many of the \"Dilbert\" strips make fun of the standard cubicle desk and the environment that it creates.\nThis project was followed in 2004 with designs for Dilbert's Ultimate House (abbreviated as DUH). An energy-efficient building was the result, designed to prevent many of the little problems that seem to creep into a normal building. For instance, to save time spent buying and decorating a Christmas tree every year, the house has a large (yet unapparent) closet adjacent to the living room where the tree can be stored from year to year.\nWebcomics.\nIn 1995, \"Dilbert\" was the first syndicated comic strip to be published for free on the Internet. Putting his email address in each \"Dilbert\" strip, Adams created a \"direct channel to [his] customers\", allowing him to modify the strip based on their feedback. Joe Zabel stated that \"Dilbert\" had a large influence on many of the webcomics that followed it, establishing the \"nerdcore\" genre as it found its audience.\nIn April 2008, United Media instituted an interactive feature on Dilbert.com, allowing fans to write speech bubbles. Adams has spoken positively about the change, saying, \"This makes cartooning a competitive sport.\"\nAwards.\nAdams was named best international comic strip artist of 1995 in the Adamson Awards given by the Swedish Academy of Comic Art.\n\"Dilbert\" won the National Cartoonists Society's Reuben Award in 1997, and was also named the best syndicated strip of 1997 in the Harvey Awards. In 1998, \"Dilbert\" won the Max &amp; Moritz Prize as best international comic strip.\nMedia.\nAnimated series.\n\"Dilbert\" was adapted into a UPN animated television series starring Daniel Stern as Dilbert, Chris Elliott as Dogbert, and Kathy Griffin as Alice. The series ran for two seasons from January 25, 1999, to July 25, 2000. The first season centered around the creation of a new product called the \"Gruntmaster 6000\". It was critically acclaimed and won an Emmy Award, leading to its renewal for a second season. The second season did away with the serial format and was composed entirely of standalone episodes, many of which shifted focus away from the workplace and involved absurdist plots such as Wally being mistaken for a religious leader (\"The Shroud of Wally\") and Dilbert being accused of mass murder (\"The Trial\"). The second season's two-episode finale included Dilbert getting pregnant with the child of a cow, a hillbilly, robot DNA, \"several dozen engineers\", an elderly billionaire, and an alien, eventually ending up in a custody battle with Stone Cold Steve Austin as the Judge.\nWhen UPN declined to renew the series for its third season, Adams stated, \"I lost my TV show for being white when UPN decided it would focus on an African-American audience.\" Adams wrote on Twitter in 2020. \"That was the third job I lost for being white. The other two in corporate America.\" The four-disc DVD called \"Dilbert: The Complete Series\" was released and contains thirty episodes. The first disc contains episodes 1\u20137, the second disc contains episodes 8\u201313, the third disc contains episodes 14\u201321, and the fourth disc contains episodes 22\u201330.\nAnimated web shorts.\nOn April 7, 2008, dilbert.com presented its first Dilbert animation. The new Dilbert animations are animated versions of original comic strips produced by RingTales and animated by Powerhouse Animation Studios. The animation videos run for around 30 seconds each and are added every weekday. The comic shorts have a different voice cast than the television series, with Washington-based radio personality Dan Roberts providing the voice of the title character. On December 10, 2009, the RingTales produced animations were made available as a calendar application for mobile devices.\nCancelled film adaptation.\nAs early as 2006, Adams and United Media had been struggling to get a film adaptation of the comic strip off the ground. Adams envisioned the idea as a live-action film, with Dogbert and Catbert as animated characters. Film director Chris Columbus was in talks to direct the film in 2007, with Tariq Jalil on board as producer.\nIn May 2010, it was announced that a live-action \"Dilbert\" film was in development. Ken Kwapis was announced as director, fresh off the heels of \"He's Just Not That Into You\" and directing several episodes for NBC's \"The Office\". Jahil remained as producer, with Phoenix Entertainment and Intrigue Entertainment joining the producing team.\nBut in December 2017, in an interview by \"The Mercury News\", Adams said that it would be impossible to make the film after his public support of Donald Trump.\n\"Drunken lemurs\" case.\nIn October 2007, the Catfish Bend Casino in Burlington, Iowa notified its staff that the casino would soon be closing for business. David Steward, an employee of seven years, then posted on an office bulletin board the \"Dilbert\" strip of October 26, 2007, that compared management decisions to those of \"drunken lemurs\". The casino called this \"very offensive\"; they identified him from a surveillance tape, fired him, and tried to prevent him from receiving unemployment benefits. However, an administrative law judge ruled in December 2007 that he would receive benefits, as his action was deemed as justified protest and not intentional misbehavior. Adams stated that it might be the first confirmed case of an employee being fired for posting a \"Dilbert\" cartoon. On February 20, 2008, the first of a series of \"Dilbert\" strips showed Wally being caught posting a comic strip that \"compares managers to drunken lemurs\". Adams later stated that fans of his work should \"stick to posting \"Garfield\" strips, as no one gets fired for that.\"\nGuest artists.\nOn February 29, 2016, Adams posted on his blog that he would be taking a six-week vacation. During that time, strips would be written by him but drawn by guest artists who work for Universal Uclick. Jake Tapper drew the strip on the week of May 23. The other guest artists were John Glynn, Eric Scott, Josh Shipley, Joel Friday, Donna Oatney and Brenna Thummler. Jake Tapper also drew the cartoon strip the week of September 23\u201328, 2019."}
{"id": "8128", "revid": "19295592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8128", "title": "Dialect", "text": "A dialect is a variety of language spoken by a particular group of people. It can also refer to a language subordinate in status to a dominant language, and is sometimes used to mean a vernacular language.\nThe more common usage of the term in English refers to a variety of a language that is a characteristic of a particular group of the language's speakers. The dialects or varieties of a particular language are closely related and, despite their differences, are most often largely mutually intelligible, especially if geographically close to one another in a dialect continuum. The term is applied most often to regional speech patterns, but a dialect may also be defined by other factors, such as social class or ethnicity. A dialect associated with a particular social class is called a sociolect; one associated with a particular ethnic group is an ethnolect; and a geographical or regional dialect is a regiolect (alternative terms include 'regionalect', 'geolect', and 'topolect'). Any variety of a given language can be classified as a \"dialect\", including standardized ones.\nA second usage, which refers to colloquial settings, typically diglossic, exists in a few countries like Italy, such as ', ' in France, much of East Central Europe, and the Philippines, and may carry a pejorative undertone and underlines the politically and socially subordinated status of an autochthonous non-national language to the country's official language(s). Dialects in this sense do not derive from a dominant language and are therefore not one of its varieties, though they may have evolved in a separate and parallel way. While they may be historically cognate with and share genetic roots in the same subfamily as the dominant national language and may, to a varying degree, share some mutual intelligibility with the latter, \"dialects\" under this second definition are separate languages from the standard or national language. Under this definition, the standard or national language would not itself be considered a dialect, as it is the dominant language in terms of linguistic prestige, social or political (e.g. official) status, predominance or prevalence, or all of the above. \"Dialect\" used this way implies a political connotation, often being used to refer to non-standardized \"low-prestige\" languages (regardless of their actual degree of distance from the national language) of limited geographic distribution, languages lacking institutional support, or even those considered to be \"unsuitable for writing\".\nOccasionally, in a third usage, \"dialect\" refers to the unwritten or non-codified languages of developing countries or isolated areas, where the term \"vernacular language\" would be preferred by linguists.\nFeatures that distinguish dialects from each other can be found in lexicon (vocabulary) and grammar (morphology, syntax) as well as in pronunciation (phonology, including prosody). In instances where the salient distinctions are only or mostly to be observed in pronunciation, the more specific term \"accent\" may be used instead of \"dialect\". Differences that are largely concentrated in lexicon may be classified as creoles. When lexical differences are mostly concentrated in the specialized vocabulary of a profession or other organization, they are jargons. Differences in vocabulary that are deliberately cultivated to exclude outsiders or to serve as shibboleths are known as cryptolects or cant, and include slangs and argots. The particular speech patterns used by an individual are referred to as that person's idiolect.\nLanguages are classified as dialects based on linguistic distance. The dialects of a language with a writing system will operate at different degrees of distance from the standardized written form. Some dialects of a language are not mutually intelligible in spoken form, leading to debate as to whether they are regiolects or separate languages.\nStandard and nonstandard dialects.\nA \"standard dialect\", also known as a \"standardized language\", is supported by institutions. Such institutional support may include any or all of the following: government recognition or designation; formal presentation in schooling as the \"correct\" form of a language; informal monitoring of everyday usage; published grammars, dictionaries, and textbooks that set forth a normative spoken and written form; and an extensive formal literature (be it prose, poetry, non-fiction, etc.) that uses it. An example of a standardized language is the French language which is supported by the institution. A nonstandard dialect also has a complete grammar and vocabulary, but is usually not the beneficiary of institutional support.\nThe distinction between the \"standard\" dialect and the \"nonstandard\" (vernacular) dialects of the same language is often arbitrary and based on social, political, cultural, or historical considerations or prevalence and prominence. In a similar way, the definitions of the terms \"language\" and \"dialect\" may overlap and are often subject to debate, with the differentiation between the two classifications often grounded in arbitrary or sociopolitical motives, and the term \"dialect\" is sometimes restricted to mean \"non-standard variety\", particularly in non-specialist settings and non-English linguistic traditions.\nDialect as linguistic variety of a language.\nThe term is applied most often to regional speech patterns, but a dialect may also be defined by other factors, such as social class or ethnicity. A dialect that is associated with a particular social class can be termed a sociolect. A dialect that is associated with a particular ethnic group can be termed an ethnolect.\nA geographical/regional dialect may be termed a regiolect (alternative terms include 'regionalect', 'geolect', and 'topolect'). According to this definition, any variety of a given language can be classified as \"a dialect\", including any standardized varieties. In this case, the distinction between the \"standard language\" (i.e. the \"standard\" dialect of a particular language) and the \"nonstandard\" (vernacular) dialects of the same language is often arbitrary and based on social, political, cultural, or historical considerations or prevalence and prominence. In a similar way, the definitions of the terms \"language\" and \"dialect\" may overlap and are often subject to debate, with the differentiation between the two classifications often grounded in arbitrary or sociopolitical motives. The term \"dialect\" is however sometimes restricted to mean \"non-standard variety\", particularly in non-specialist settings and non-English linguistic traditions. Conversely, some dialectologists have reserved the term \"dialect\" for forms that they believed (sometimes wrongly) to be purer forms of the older languages, as in how early dialectologists of English did not consider the Brummie of Birmingham or the Scouse of Liverpool to be real dialects, as they had arisen fairly recently in time and partly as a result of influences from Irish migrants.\nDifference between dialects and languages.\nThere is no universally accepted criterion for distinguishing two different languages from two dialects (i.e. varieties) of the same language. A number of rough measures exist, sometimes leading to contradictory results. The distinction between dialect and language is therefore subjective and depends upon the user's preferred frame of reference. For example, there has been discussion about whether or not the Lim\u00f3n Creole English should be considered \"a kind\" of English or a different language. This creole is spoken in the Caribbean coast of Costa Rica (Central America) by descendants of Jamaican people. The position that Costa Rican linguists support depends upon which university they represent. Another example is Scanian, which even, for a time, had its own ISO code.\nLinguistic distance.\nAn important criterion for categorizing varieties of language is linguistic distance. For a variety to be considered a dialect, the linguistic distance between the two varieties must be low. Linguistic distance between spoken or written forms of language increases as the differences between the forms are characterized. For example, two languages with completely different syntactical structures would have a high linguistic distance, while a language with very few differences from another may be considered a dialect or a sibling of that language. Linguistic distance may be used to determine language families and language siblings. For example, languages with little linguistic distance, like Dutch and German, are considered siblings. Dutch and German are siblings in the West-Germanic language group. Some language siblings are closer to each other in terms of linguistic distance than to other linguistic siblings. French and Spanish, siblings in the Romance Branch of the Indo-European group, are closer to each other than they are to any of the languages of the West-Germanic group. When languages are close in terms of linguistic distance, they resemble one another, hence why dialects are not considered linguistically distant to their parent language.\nMutual intelligibility.\nOne criterion, which is often considered to be purely linguistic, is that of mutual intelligibility: two varieties are said to be dialects of the same language if being a speaker of one variety has sufficient knowledge to understand and be understood by a speaker of the other dialect; otherwise, they are said to be different languages. However, this definition has often been criticized, especially in the case of a dialect continuum (or dialect chain), which contains a sequence of varieties, where each mutually intelligible with the next, but may not be mutually intelligible with distant varieties.\nOthers have argued that mutual intelligibility occurs in varying degrees, and the potential difficulty in distinguishing between intelligibility and prior familiarity with the other variety. However, recent research suggests that there is some empirical evidence in favor of using some form of the intelligibility criterion to distinguish between languages and dialects, though mutuality may not be as relevant as initially thought. The requirement for mutuality is abandoned by the \"Language Survey Reference Guide\" of SIL International, publishers of the \"Ethnologue\" and the registration authority for the ISO 639-3 standard for language codes. They define a \"dialect cluster\" as a central variety together with all those varieties whose speakers understand the central variety at a specified threshold level or higher. If the threshold level is high, usually between 70% and 85%, the cluster is designated as a \"language\".\nSociolinguistic definitions.\nAnother occasionally used criterion for discriminating dialects from languages is the sociolinguistic notion of linguistic authority. According to this definition, two varieties are considered dialects of the same language if (under at least some circumstances) they would defer to the same authority regarding some questions about their language. For instance, to learn the name of a new invention, or an obscure foreign species of plant, speakers of Westphalian and East Franconian German might each consult a German dictionary or ask a German-speaking expert in the subject. Thus these varieties are said to be dependent on, or heteronomous with respect to, Standard German, which is said to be autonomous.\nIn contrast, speakers in the Netherlands of Low Saxon varieties similar to Westphalian would instead consult a dictionary of Standard Dutch, and hence is categorized as a dialect of Dutch instead. Similarly, although Yiddish is classified by linguists as a language in the High German group of languages and has some degree of mutual intelligibility with German, a Yiddish speaker would consult a Yiddish dictionary rather than a German dictionary in such a case, and is classified as its own language.\nWithin this framework, W. A. Stewart defined a \"language\" as an autonomous variety in addition to all the varieties that are heteronomous with respect to it, noting that an essentially equivalent definition had been stated by Charles A. Ferguson and John J. Gumperz in 1960. A heteronomous variety may be considered a \"dialect\" of a language defined in this way. In these terms, Danish and Norwegian, though mutually intelligible to a large degree, are considered separate languages. In the framework of Heinz Kloss, these are described as languages by \"ausbau\" (development) rather than by \"abstand\" (separation).\nDialect and language clusters.\nIn other situations, a closely related group of varieties possess considerable (though incomplete) mutual intelligibility, but none dominates the others. To describe this situation, the editors of the \"Handbook of African Languages\" introduced the term dialect cluster as a classificatory unit at the same level as a language. A similar situation, but with a greater degree of mutual unintelligibility, has been termed a language cluster.\nIn the \"Language Survey Reference Guide\" issued by SIL International, who produce \"Ethnologue\", a \"dialect cluster\" is defined as a central variety together with a collection of varieties whose speakers can understand the central variety at a specified threshold level (usually between 70% and 85%) or higher. It is not required that peripheral varieties be understood by speakers of the central variety or of other peripheral varieties. A minimal set of central varieties providing coverage of a dialect continuum may be selected algorithmically from intelligibility data.\nPolitical factors.\nIn many societies, however, a particular dialect, often the sociolect of the elite class, comes to be identified as the \"standard\" or \"proper\" version of a language by those seeking to make a social distinction and is contrasted with other varieties. As a result of this, in some contexts, the term \"dialect\" refers specifically to varieties with low social status. In this secondary sense of \"dialect\", language varieties are often called \"dialects\" rather than \"languages\":\nThe status of \"language\" is not solely determined by linguistic criteria, but it is also the result of a historical and political development. Romansh came to be a written language, and therefore it is recognized as a language, even though it is very close to the Lombardic alpine dialects and classical Latin. An opposite example is Chinese, whose variations such as Mandarin and Cantonese are often called dialects and not languages in China, despite their mutual unintelligibility.\nNational boundaries sometimes make the distinction between \"language\" and \"dialect\" an issue of political importance. A group speaking a separate \"language\" may be seen as having a greater claim to being a separate \"people\", and thus to be more deserving of its own independent state, while a group speaking a \"dialect\" may be seen as a sub-group, part of a bigger people, which must content itself with regional autonomy.\nThe Yiddish linguist Max Weinreich published the expression, \"A shprakh iz a dialekt mit an armey un flot\" (: \"A language is a dialect with an army and navy\") in \"YIVO Bleter\" 25.1, 1945, p.\u00a013. The significance of the political factors in any attempt at answering the question \"what is a language?\" is great enough to cast doubt on whether any strictly linguistic definition, without a socio-cultural approach, is possible. This is illustrated by the frequency with which the army-navy aphorism is cited.\nTerminology.\nBy the definition most commonly used by linguists, any linguistic variety can be considered a \"dialect\" of \"some\" language\u2014\"everybody speaks a dialect\". According to that interpretation, the criteria above merely serve to distinguish whether two varieties are dialects of the \"same\" language or dialects of \"different\" languages.\nThe terms \"language\" and \"dialect\" are not necessarily mutually exclusive, although they are often perceived to be. Thus there is nothing contradictory in the statement \"the \"language\" of the Pennsylvania Dutch is a dialect of German\".\nThere are various terms that linguists may use to avoid taking a position on whether the speech of a community is an independent language in its own right or a dialect of another language. Perhaps the most common is \"variety\"; \"lect\" is another. A more general term is \"languoid\", which does not distinguish between dialects, languages, and groups of languages, whether genealogically related or not.\nColloquial meaning of dialect.\nThe colloquial meaning of dialect can be understood by example, e.g. in Italy (see '), France (see ') and the Philippines, carries a pejorative undertone and underlines the politically and socially subordinated status of a non-national language to the country's single official language. In other words, these \"dialects\" are not actual dialects in the same sense as in the first usage, as they do not derive from the politically dominant language and are therefore not one of its varieties, but instead they evolved in a separate and parallel way and may thus better fit various parties' criteria for a separate language.\nDespite this, these \"dialects\" may often be historically cognate and share genetic roots in the same subfamily as the dominant national language and may even, to a varying degree, share some mutual intelligibility with the latter. In this sense, unlike in the first usage, the national language would not itself be considered a \"dialect\", as it is the dominant language in a particular state, be it in terms of linguistic prestige, social or political (e.g. official) status, predominance or prevalence, or all of the above. The term \"dialect\" used this way implies a political connotation, being mostly used to refer to low-prestige languages (regardless of their actual degree of distance from the national language), languages lacking institutional support, or those perceived as \"unsuitable for writing\". The designation \"dialect\" is also used popularly to refer to the unwritten or non-codified languages of developing countries or isolated areas, where the term \"vernacular language\" would be preferred by linguists.\nDialect and accent.\nJohn Lyons writes that \"Many linguists [...] subsume differences of accent under differences of dialect.\" In general, \"accent\" refers to variations in pronunciation, while \"dialect\" also encompasses specific variations in grammar and vocabulary.\nExamples.\nArabic.\nThere are three geographical zones in which Arabic is spoken (Jastrow 2002). Zone I is categorized as the area in which Arabic was spoken before the rise of Islam. It is the Arabian Peninsula, excluding the areas where southern Arabian was spoken. Zone II is categorized as the areas to which Arabic speaking peoples moved as a result of the conquests of Islam. Included in Zone II are the Levant, Egypt, North Africa, Iraq, and some parts of Iran. The Egyptian, Sudanese, and Levantine dialects (including the Syrian dialect) are well documented, and widely spoken and studied. Zone III comprises the areas in which Arabic is spoken outside of the continuous Arabic Language area.\nSpoken dialects of the Arabic language share the same writing system and share Modern Standard Arabic as their common prestige dialect used in writing.\nGerman.\nWhen talking about the German language, the term German dialects is only used for the traditional regional varieties. That allows them to be distinguished from the regional varieties of modern standard German. The German dialects show a wide spectrum of variation. Some of them are not mutually intelligible. German dialectology traditionally names the major dialect groups after Germanic tribes from which they were assumed to have descended.\nThe extent to which the dialects are spoken varies according to a number of factors: In Northern Germany, dialects are less common than in the South. In cities, dialects are less common than in the countryside. In a public environment, dialects are less common than in a familiar environment.\nThe situation in Switzerland and Liechtenstein is different from the rest of the German-speaking countries. The Swiss German dialects are the default everyday language in virtually every situation, whereas standard German is only spoken in education, partially in media, and with foreigners not possessing knowledge of Swiss German. Most Swiss German speakers perceive standard German to be a foreign language.\nThe Low German and Low Franconian varieties spoken in Germany are often counted among the German dialects. This reflects the modern situation where they are roofed by standard German. This is different from the situation in the Middle Ages when Low German had strong tendencies towards an ausbau language.\nThe Frisian languages spoken in Germany and the Netherlands are excluded from the German dialects.\nItaly.\nItaly is an often quoted example of a country where the second definition of the word \"dialect\" (\"dialetto\") is most prevalent. Italy is in fact home to a vast array of separate languages, most of which lack mutual intelligibility with one another and have their own local varieties; twelve of them (Albanian, Catalan, German, Greek, Slovene, Croatian, French, Franco-Proven\u00e7al, Friulian, Ladin, Occitan and Sardinian) underwent Italianization to a varying degree (ranging from the currently endangered state displayed by Sardinian and southern Italian Greek to the vigorous promotion of Germanic Tyrolean), but have been officially recognized as minority languages (\"minoranze linguistiche storiche\"), in light of their distinctive historical development. Yet, most of the regional languages spoken across the peninsula are often colloquially referred to in non-linguistic circles as Italian \"dialetti\", since most of them, including the prestigious Neapolitan, Sicilian and Venetian, have adopted vulgar Tuscan as their reference language since the Middle Ages. However, all these languages evolved from Vulgar Latin in parallel with Italian, long prior to the popular diffusion of the latter throughout what is now Italy.\nDuring the \"Risorgimento\", Italian still existed mainly as a literary language, and only 2.5% of Italy's population could speak Italian. Proponents of Italian nationalism, like the Lombard Alessandro Manzoni, stressed the importance of establishing a uniform national language in order to better create an Italian national identity. With the unification of Italy in the 1860s, Italian became the official national language of the new Italian state, while the other ones came to be institutionally regarded as \"dialects\" subordinate to Italian, and negatively associated with a lack of education.\nIn the early 20th century, the conscription of Italian men from all throughout Italy during World War I is credited with having facilitated the diffusion of Italian among the less educated conscripted soldiers, as these men, who had been speaking various regional languages up until then, found themselves forced to communicate with each other in a common tongue while serving in the Italian military. With the popular spread of Italian out of the intellectual circles, because of the mass-media and the establishment of public education, Italians from all regions were increasingly exposed to Italian. While dialect levelling has increased the number of Italian speakers and decreased the number of speakers of other languages native to Italy, Italians in different regions have developed variations of standard Italian specific to their region. These variations of standard Italian, known as \"regional Italian\", would thus more appropriately be called dialects in accordance with the first linguistic definition of the term, as they are in fact derived from Italian, with some degree of influence from the local or regional native languages and accents.\nThe most widely spoken languages of Italy, which are not to be confused with regional Italian, fall within a family of which even Italian is part, the Italo-Dalmatian group. This wide category includes:\nModern Italian is heavily based on the Florentine dialect of Tuscan. The Tuscan-based language that would eventually become modern Italian had been used in poetry and literature since at least the 12th century, and it first spread outside the Tuscan linguistic borders through the works of the so-called \"tre corone\" (\"three crowns\"): Dante Alighieri, Petrarch, and Giovanni Boccaccio. Florentine thus gradually rose to prominence as the \"volgare\" of the literate and upper class in Italy, and it spread throughout the peninsula and Sicily as the \"lingua franca\" among the Italian educated class as well as Italian travelling merchants. The economic prowess and cultural and artistic importance of Tuscany in the Late Middle Ages and the Renaissance further encouraged the diffusion of the Florentine-Tuscan Italian throughout Italy and among the educated and powerful, though local and regional languages remained the main languages of the common people.\nAside from the Italo-Dalmatian languages, the second most widespread family in Italy is the Gallo-Italic group, spanning throughout much of Northern Italy's languages and dialects (such as Piedmontese, Emilian-Romagnol, Ligurian, Lombard, Venetian, Sicily's and Basilicata's Gallo-Italic in southern Italy, etc.).\nFinally, other languages from a number of different families follow the last two major groups: the Gallo-Romance languages (French, Occitan and its Vivaro-Alpine dialect, Franco-Proven\u00e7al); the Rhaeto-Romance languages (Friulian and Ladin); the Ibero-Romance languages (Sardinia's Algherese); the Germanic Cimbrian, Southern Bavarian, Walser German and the M\u00f2cheno language; the Albanian Arb\u00ebresh language; the Hellenic Griko language and Calabrian Greek; the Serbo-Croatian Slavomolisano dialect; and the various Slovene languages, including the Gail Valley dialect and Istrian dialect. The language indigenous to Sardinia, while being Romance in nature, is considered to be a specific linguistic family of its own, separate from the other Neo-Latin groups; it is often subdivided into the Centro-Southern and Centro-Northern dialects.\nThough mostly mutually unintelligible, the exact degree to which all the Italian languages are mutually unintelligible varies, often correlating with geographical distance or geographical barriers between the languages; some regional Italian languages that are closer in geographical proximity to each other or closer to each other on the dialect continuum are more or less mutually intelligible. For instance, a speaker of purely Eastern Lombard, a language in Northern Italy's Lombardy region that includes the Bergamasque dialect, would have severely limited mutual intelligibility with a purely Italian speaker and would be nearly completely unintelligible to a Sicilian-speaking individual. Due to Eastern Lombard's status as a Gallo-Italic language, an Eastern Lombard speaker may, in fact, have more mutual intelligibility with an Occitan, Catalan, or French speaker than with an Italian or Sicilian speaker. Meanwhile, a Sicilian-speaking person would have a greater degree of mutual intelligibility with a speaker of the more closely related Neapolitan language, but far less mutual intelligibility with a person speaking Sicilian Gallo-Italic, a language that developed in isolated Lombard emigrant communities on the same island as the Sicilian language.\nToday, the majority of Italian nationals are able to speak Italian, though many Italians still speak their regional language regularly or as their primary day-to-day language, especially at home with family or when communicating with Italians from the same town or region.\nThe Balkans.\nThe classification of speech varieties as dialects or languages and their relationship to other varieties of speech can be controversial and the verdicts inconsistent. Serbo-Croatian illustrates this point. Serbo-Croatian has two major formal variants (Serbian and Croatian). Both are based on the \"Shtokavian\" dialect and therefore mutually intelligible with differences found mostly in their respective local vocabularies and minor grammatical differences. Certain dialects of Serbia (\"Torlakian\") and Croatia (\"Kajkavian\" and \"Chakavian\"), however, are not mutually intelligible even though they are usually subsumed under Serbo-Croatian. How these dialects should be classified in relation to Shtokavian remains a matter of dispute.\nMacedonian, which is largely mutually intelligible with Bulgarian and certain dialects of Serbo-Croatian (Torlakian), is considered by Bulgarian linguists to be a Bulgarian dialect, while in North Macedonia, it is regarded as a language in its own right. Before the establishment of a literary standard of Macedonian in 1944, in most sources in and out of Bulgaria before the Second World War, the South Slavic dialect continuum covering the area of today's North Macedonia were referred to as Bulgarian dialects. Sociolinguists agree that the question of whether Macedonian is a dialect of Bulgarian or a language is a political one and cannot be resolved on a purely linguistic basis.\nLebanon.\nIn Lebanon, a part of the Christian population considers \"Lebanese\" to be in some sense a distinct language from Arabic and not merely a dialect thereof. During the civil war, Christians often used Lebanese Arabic officially, and sporadically used the Latin script to write Lebanese, thus further distinguishing it from Arabic. All Lebanese laws are written in the standard literary form of Arabic, though parliamentary debate may be conducted in Lebanese Arabic.\nMalay.\nMalay has a long history as a lingua franca (Indonesian and Malay: \"basantara\") in the Malay Archipelago which currently includes Indonesia, Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei Darussalam, Singapore, East Timor, and the southern part of Thailand. This geographical variation, which then spread widely even to South Africa, finally led to the formation of a Malay language cluster which spread and had differences due to geographical conditions.\nThe Malay language is pluricentric and a macrolanguage, i.e., several varieties of it are standardized as the national language ( or ) of several nation states with various official names: in Malaysia, it is designated as either (\"Malaysian\") or also (\"Malay language\"); in Singapore and Brunei, it is called (\"Malay language\"); in Indonesia, an autonomous normative variety called (\"Indonesian language\") is designated the (\"unifying language\" or lingua franca) whereas the term \"Malay\" () is domestically restricted to vernacular varieties of Malay indigenous to areas of Central to Southern Sumatra and West Kalimantan.\nNorth Africa.\nIn Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco, the Darijas translated as literally meaning Dialect in Arabic (spoken North African languages) are sometimes considered more different from other Arabic dialects. Officially, North African countries prefer to give preference to the Literary Arabic and conduct much of their political and religious life in it (adherence to Islam), and refrain from declaring each country's specific variety to be a separate language, because Literary Arabic is the liturgical language of Islam and the language of the Islamic sacred book, the Qur'an. Although, especially since the 1960s, the Darijas are occupying an increasing use and influence in the cultural life of these countries. Examples of cultural elements where Darijas' use became dominant include: theatre, film, music, television, advertisement, social media, folk-tale books and companies' names.\nUkraine.\nThe Modern Ukrainian language has been in common use since the late 17th century, associated with the establishment of the Cossack Hetmanate. In the 19th century, the Tsarist Government of the Russian Empire claimed that Ukrainian (or Little Russian, per official name) was merely a dialect of Russian (or Polonized dialect) and not a language on its own (same concept as for Belarusian language). That concepted was enrooted soon after the partitions of Poland. According to these claims, the differences were few and caused by the conquest of western Ukraine by the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. However, in reality the dialects in Ukraine were developing independently from the dialects in the modern Russia for several centuries, and as a result they differed substantially.\nFollowing the Spring of Nations in Europe and efforts of the Brotherhood of Saints Cyril and Methodius, across the so-called \"Southwestern Krai\" of Russian Empire started to spread cultural societies of Hromada and their Sunday schools. Themselves \"hromadas\" acted in same manner as Orthodox fraternities of Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth back in 15th century. Around that time in Ukraine becoming popular political movements Narodnichestvo (Narodniks) and Khlopomanstvo.\nMoldova.\nThere have been cases of a variety of speech being deliberately reclassified to serve political purposes. One example is Moldovan. In 1996, the Moldovan Parliament, citing fears of \"Romanian expansionism\", rejected a proposal from President Mircea Snegur to change the name of the language to Romanian, and in 2003 a Moldovan\u2013Romanian dictionary was published, purporting to show that the two countries speak different languages. Linguists of the Romanian Academy reacted by declaring that all the Moldovan words were also Romanian words; while in Moldova, the head of the Academy of Sciences of Moldova, Ion B\u0103rbu\u0163\u0103, described the dictionary as a politically motivated \"absurdity\". On 22 March 2023, the president of Moldova, Maia Sandu, promulgated a law passed by Parliament that named the national language as \"Romanian\" in all legislative texts and the constitution.\nGreater China.\nUnlike languages that use alphabets to indicate their pronunciation, Chinese characters have developed from logograms that do not always give hints to their pronunciation. Although the written characters have remained relatively consistent for the last two thousand years, the pronunciation and grammar in different regions have developed to an extent that the varieties of the spoken language are often mutually unintelligible. As a series of migration to the south throughout the history, the regional languages of the south, including Gan, Xiang, Wu, Min, Yue and Hakka often show traces of Old Chinese or Middle Chinese.\nFrom the Ming dynasty onward, Beijing has been the capital of China and the dialect spoken in Beijing has had the most prestige among other varieties. With the founding of the Republic of China, Standard Mandarin was designated as the official language, based on the spoken language of Beijing. Since then, other spoken varieties are regarded as \"fangyan\" (regional speech). Cantonese is still the most commonly-used language in Guangzhou, Hong Kong, Macau and among some overseas Chinese communities, whereas Hokkien has been accepted in Taiwan as an important local language alongside Mandarin. Then starting in the 1950s, the written language also diverged when the People's Republic of China introduced simplified characters, which are now used throughout the country. Traditional characters are still the norm in Taiwan and some other overseas communities.\nHindi and Urdu.\nHindi is one of the official languages of India, alongside English, and an official language in nine states (including Gujarat, where Gujarati is the most spoken language). Urdu is the national and official language of Pakistan, as well as being an additional official language in 5 states of India (3 of the 8 Hindi speaking states plus Andhra Pradesh and Telangana). While it is the second language for most Pakistanis (outside of muhajirs who immigrated during partition and their descendants) in favor of languages like Punjabi and Sindhi, it is the first language of most Indian Muslims in North India and the Deccan Plateau.\nThe two languages in their colloquially spoken form are mutually intelligible, but in written form, Hindi uses the Devanagari script while Urdu uses the Perso-Arabic script. For formal vocabulary, the two languages diverge, with Hindi drawing more from Sanskrit and Urdu more from Persian or Arabic. \nIn addition, several other dialects or languages are classified under Hindi that did not descend from it. Standard Hindi and Urdu are based off Khari Boli, the dialect spoken around Delhi. Other dialects with high mutual intelligibility spoken in surrounding areas include Haryanvi and languages from Western Uttar Pradesh, like Braj Bhasha. But many languages less similar to Standard Hindi do not have official status under the 8th Schedule to the Constitution of India and are instead classified as dialects of Hindi. This includes Bhojpuri, spoken in Eastern Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, which does not have official status in either state or in the 8th Schedule, despite being spoken by over 50 million people. But over time, more languages have been recognized as distinct from Hindi. Maithili was made a scheduled language of India in 2003, and Chhattisgarhi was made official in Chhattisgarh."}
{"id": "8129", "revid": "1934512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8129", "title": "Digitalis", "text": "Digitalis ( or ) is a genus of about 20 species of herbaceous perennial plants, shrubs, and biennials, commonly called foxgloves.\n\"Digitalis\" is native to Europe, Western Asia, and northwestern Africa. The flowers are tubular in shape, produced on a tall spike, and vary in colour with species, from purple to pink, white, and yellow. The name derives from the Latin word for \"finger\". The genus was traditionally placed in the figwort family, Scrophulariaceae, but phylogenetic research led taxonomists to move it to the Veronicaceae in 2001. More recent phylogenetic work has placed it in the much enlarged family Plantaginaceae.\nThe best-known species is the common foxglove, \"Digitalis purpurea\". This biennial is often grown as an ornamental plant due to its vivid flowers, which range in colour from various purple tints through pink and purely white. The flowers can also possess various marks and spottings. Other garden-worthy species include \"D. ferruginea\", \"D. grandiflora\", \"D. lutea\", and \"D. parviflora\".\nThe term \"digitalis\" is also used for drug preparations that contain cardiac glycosides, particularly one called digoxin, extracted from various plants of this genus. Foxglove has medicinal uses but is also very toxic to humans and other animals, and consumption can even lead to death.\nEtymology.\nThe generic epithet \"Digitalis\" is from the Latin \"digitus\" (finger). Leonhart Fuchs first invented the name for this plant in his 1542 book \"De historia stirpium commentarii insignes\" (\"Notable comments on the history of plants\"), based upon the German vernacular name \"Fingerhut\", which translates literally as 'finger hat', but actually means 'thimble'.\nThe name is recorded in Old English as 'foxes glofe/glofa' or 'fox's glove'. Over time, folk myths obscured the literal origins of the name, insinuating that foxes wore the flowers on their paws to silence their movements as they stealthily hunted their prey. The woody hillsides where the foxes made their dens were often covered with the toxic flowers. Some of the more menacing names, such as \"witch's glove\", reference the toxicity of the plant.\nHenry Fox Talbot (1847) proposed 'folks' glove', where 'folk' means fairy. Similarly, R. C. A. Prior (1863) suggested an etymology of 'foxes-glew', meaning 'fairy music'. However, neither of these suggestions account for the Old English form \"foxes glofa\".\nTaxonomy.\nSpecies.\nThe \"Flora Europaea\" originally recognised a number of species now seen as synonyms of \"Digitalis purpurea\", or others: \"D. dubia\", \"D. leucophaea\", \"D. micrantha\" and \"D. trojana\". As of 2017, \"Plants of the World Online\" recognises the following 27 species (and a number of hybrids):\nSystematics.\nThe first full monograph regarding this genus was written by Lindley in 1821. He included two sections, a section \"Isoplexis\" including two species, and the main section \"Digitalis\" with three subsections, including 2Y species, a number of which are now seen as synonyms or hybrids.\nIn the last full monograph of the genus in 1965, Werner classified the 19 recognised species in five sections (four species from Macaronesia were separated in the genus \"Isoplexis\" at the time):\nIn their 2000 book about \"Digitalis\", Luckner and Wichtl continued to uphold Werner's classification of the 19 species, but molecular studies into the phylogeny of the genus published in 2004 found that although four of Werner's sections were supported by the genetics, the section \"Tubiflorae\" was polyphyletic, and that the species \"D. lutea\" and \"D. viridiflora\" should be placed in the section \"Grandiflorae\". This study, as well as a number of other studies published around that time, reunited the genus \"Isoplexis\" with \"Digitalis\", increasing the number of species to 23.\nPeter Hadland Davis, an expert on the flora of Turkey, had used a different circumscription than Werner in his works, and recognised eight species in the country. A 2016 molecular phylogenetic study into the relationships of the Turkish species in the section \"Globiflorae\" aimed to reconcile this discrepancy, finding that the classification as proposed by Davis was largely correct: \"Globiflorae\" contained as distinct species \"D. cariensis\", \"D. ferruginea\", \"D. lamarckii\", \"D. lanata\" and \"D. nervosa\", and \"D. trojana\" was subsumed at the infraspecific rank as \"D. lanata\" subsp. \"trojana\". This study listed 23 species: \"D. transiens\", \"D. cedretorum\", \"D. ikarica\" and \"D. fuscescens\" were not mentioned. \"D. parviflora\" and \"D. subalpina\" were not tested in this study, but the 2004 study found these two species situated within the section \"Globiflorae\".\nEcology.\nLarvae of the foxglove pug, a moth, consume the flowers of the common foxglove for food. Other species of Lepidoptera eat the leaves, including the lesser yellow underwing. The shape of the foxglove's flowers makes it especially attractive to long-tongued bees, such as the common carder bee. The bright flowers attract the bee, which lands on the lower lip of the bloom before climbing up the tube. This means that the bee is likely to drop any pollen it may have collected from other foxgloves, thereby facilitating propagation.\nUses.\nHistorical uses.\nNicholas Culpeper included Foxglove in his 1652 herbal medicine guide, \"The English Physician\". He cited its use for healing wounds (both fresh and old), as a purgative, for \"the King's Evil\" ( mycobacterial cervical lymphadenitis), for \"the falling sickness\" (epilepsy), and for \"a scabby head\". There is no empirical evidence for these claims, and it is not used for these conditions in modern medicine, only for slowing excessive heart rate in certain circumstances and/or strengthening heart muscle contraction in heart failure.\nMedicinal uses.\nDigitalis is an example of a drug derived from a plant that was formerly used by herbalists; herbalists have largely abandoned its use because of its narrow therapeutic index and the difficulty of determining the amount of active drug in herbal preparations. Once the usefulness of digitalis in regulating the human pulse was understood, it was employed for a variety of purposes, including the treatment of epilepsy and other seizure disorders, which are now considered to be inappropriate treatments.\nA group of medicines extracted from foxglove plants are called digitalin. The use of \"D. purpurea\" extract containing cardiac glycosides for the treatment of heart conditions was first described in the English-speaking medical literature by William Withering, in 1785, which is considered the beginning of modern therapeutics. In contemporary medicine, digitalis (usually digoxin) is obtained from \"D. lanata\". It is used to increase cardiac contractility (it is a positive inotrope) and as an antiarrhythmic agent to control the heart rate, particularly in the irregular (and often fast) atrial fibrillation. Digitalis is hence often prescribed for patients in atrial fibrillation, especially if they have been diagnosed with congestive heart failure. Digoxin was approved for heart failure in 1998 under current regulations by the Food and Drug Administration on the basis of prospective, randomized study and clinical trials. It was also approved for the control of ventricular response rate for patients with atrial fibrillation. American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines recommend digoxin for symptomatic chronic heart failure for patients with reduced systolic function, preservation of systolic function, and/or rate control for atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response. Heart Failure Society of America guidelines for heart failure provide similar recommendations. Despite its relatively recent approval by the Food and Drug Administration and the guideline recommendations, the therapeutic use of digoxin is declining in patients with heart failure\u2014likely the result of several factors. The main factor is the more recent introduction of several drugs shown in randomised controlled studies to improve outcomes in heart failure. Safety concerns regarding a proposed link between digoxin therapy and increased mortality seen in observational studies may have contributed to the decline in therapeutic use of digoxin, however a systematic review of 75 studies including four million patient years of patient follow-up showed that in properly designed randomised controlled studies, mortality was no higher in patients given digoxin than in those given placebo.\nRomani people use foxglove to treat eczema.\nVariations.\nA group of pharmacologically active compounds are extracted mostly from the leaves of the second year's growth, and in pure form are referred to by common chemical names, such as digitoxin or digoxin, or by brand names such as Crystodigin and Lanoxin, respectively. The two drugs differ in that digoxin has an additional hydroxyl group at the C-3 position on the B-ring (adjacent to the pentane). This results in digoxin having a half-life of about one day (and increasing with impaired kidney function), whereas digitoxin's is about 7 days and not affected by kidney function. Both molecules include a lactone and a triple-repeating sugar called a glycoside.\nMechanism of action.\nDigitalis works by inhibiting sodium-potassium ATPase. This results in an increased intracellular concentration of sodium ions and thus a decreased concentration gradient across the cell membrane. This increase in intracellular sodium causes the Na/Ca exchanger to reverse potential, i.e., transition from pumping sodium into the cell in exchange for pumping calcium out of the cell, to pumping sodium out of the cell in exchange for pumping calcium into the cell. This leads to an increase in cytoplasmic calcium concentration, which improves cardiac contractility. Under normal physiological conditions, the cytoplasmic calcium used in cardiac contractions originates from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, an intracellular organelle that stores calcium. Human newborns, some animals, and patients with chronic heart failure lack well developed and fully functioning sarcoplasmic reticula and must rely on the Na/Ca exchanger to provide all or a majority of the cytoplasmic calcium required for cardiac contraction. For this to occur, cytoplasmic sodium must exceed its typical concentration to favour a reversal in potential, which naturally occurs in human newborns and some animals primarily through an elevated heart rate; in patients with chronic heart failure it occurs through the administration of digitalis. As a result of increased contractility, stroke volume is increased. Ultimately, digitalis increases cardiac output (cardiac output = stroke volume x heart rate). This is the mechanism that makes this drug a popular treatment for congestive heart failure, which is characterized by low cardiac output.\nDigitalis also has a vagal effect on the parasympathetic nervous system, and can be used to slow the ventricular rate during atrial fibrillation (unless there's an accessory pathway, when it can paradoxically increase the heart rate). The dependence on the vagal effect means digitalis is not effective when a patient has a high sympathetic nervous system drive, which is the case with acutely ill persons, and also during exercise.\nMolecular probes.\nDigoxigenin (DIG) is a steroid found in the flowers and leaves of \"Digitalis\" species, and is extracted from \"D. lanata\". Digoxigenin can be used as a molecular probe to detect mRNA in situ and label DNA, RNA, and oligonucleotides. It can easily be attached to nucleotides such as uridine by chemical modifications. DIG molecules are often linked to nucleotides; DIG-labelled uridine can then be incorporated into RNA via \"in vitro\" transcription. Once hybridisation occurs, RNA with the incorporated DIG-U can be detected with anti-DIG antibodies conjugated to alkaline phosphatase. To reveal the hybridised transcripts, a chromogen can be used which reacts with the alkaline phosphatase to produce a coloured precipitate.\nToxicity.\nDepending on the species, the digitalis plant may contain several deadly physiological and chemically related cardiac and steroidal glycosides. Thus, the digitalis plants have earned several, more sinister, names: dead man's bells and witch's gloves. The toxins can be absorbed via the skin or ingestion.\nDigitalis intoxication, known as \"digitalism\", results from an overdose of digitalis and can cause gastrointestinal, cardiac and neurological effects. The former include appetite loss, nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea; the cardiac symptoms include both tachycardia, and bradycardia (either of which, if severe enough, can result in syncope\u2014see below); and the neurological effects include fatigue, delirium, and rarely xanthopsia (jaundiced or yellow vision). Other oculotoxic effects of digitalis include generalized blurry vision, as well as the appearance of blurred outlines ('halos'). Other things mentioned are dilated pupils, drooling, weakness, collapse, seizures, and even death.\nDigitalis poisoning can cause indirect inhibition of the atrioventricular node via a direct effect on the vagal nucleus. This results in bradycardia (decreased heart rate) or if severe enough, heart block. The direct effect of cardiac glycosides on heart muscle cells is to increase contraction of the cells, both in force and frequency, tending to produce tachycardia (increased heart rate), depending on the dose, the condition of one's heart, and the prevailing chemistry of the blood (specifically any of: low potassium, high calcium and low magnesium). Electrical cardioversion (to \"shock\" the heart) is generally not indicated in ventricular fibrillation in digitalis toxicity, as it can make the rhythm disturbance more complicated or sustained. Furthermore, the classic drug of choice for ventricular fibrillation in emergency setting, amiodarone, can worsen the dysrhythmia caused by digitalis, therefore, the second-choice drug lidocaine is more commonly used. Mild toxicity is treated by stopping the medication and general supportive measures; severe toxicity is treated with anti-digoxin antibody fragments.\nThe entire plant is toxic (including the roots and seeds). Mortality is rare, but case reports do exist. Most plant exposures occur in children younger than six years and are usually unintentional and without associated significant toxicity. More serious toxicity occurs with intentional ingestion by adolescents and adults.\nIn some instances, people have confused foxglove with the relatively harmless comfrey (\"Symphytum\") plant, which is sometimes brewed into a tea, with fatal consequences. Other fatal accidents involve children drinking the water in a vase containing digitalis plants. Drying does not reduce the toxicity of the plant. The plant is toxic to animals, including all classes of livestock and poultry, as well as felines and canines.\nIn popular culture.\nAccording to 1981 speculation, Vincent van Gogh's \"Yellow Period\" may have been influenced by digitalis, because it had been proposed as a therapy to control epilepsy around this time, and there are two paintings by the artist where the plant is present. Other studies immediately questioned this: there are a large number of other possible explanations for van Gogh's choice of palette, there is no evidence that van Gogh was ever given the drug or that his physician prescribed it, he was tested and had no xanthopsia, and in his many letters of the time he makes it clear that he simply liked using the colour yellow, but it has remained a popular theory."}
{"id": "8130", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8130", "title": "Digital Video", "text": ""}
{"id": "8131", "revid": "42195518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8131", "title": "Dendrite", "text": "A dendrite (from Greek \u03b4\u03ad\u03bd\u03b4\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd \"d\u00e9ndron\", \"tree\") or dendron is a branched cytoplasmic process that extends from a nerve cell that propagates the electrochemical stimulation received from other neural cells to the cell body, or soma, of the neuron from which the dendrites project. Electrical stimulation is transmitted onto dendrites by upstream neurons (usually via their axons) via synapses which are located at various points throughout the dendritic tree.\nDendrites play a critical role in integrating these synaptic inputs and in determining the extent to which action potentials are produced by the neuron.\nStructure and function.\nDendrites are one of two types of cytoplasmic processes that extrude from the cell body of a neuron, the other type being an axon. Axons can be distinguished from dendrites by several features including shape, length, and function. Dendrites often taper off in shape and are shorter, while axons tend to maintain a constant radius and can be very long. Typically, axons transmit electrochemical signals and dendrites receive the electrochemical signals, although some types of neurons in certain species lack specialized axons and transmit signals via their dendrites. Dendrites provide an enlarged surface area to receive signals from axon terminals of other neurons. The dendrite of a large pyramidal cell receives signals from about 30,000 presynaptic neurons. Excitatory synapses terminate on dendritic spines, tiny protrusions from the dendrite with a high density of neurotransmitter receptors. Most inhibitory synapses directly contact the dendritic shaft.\nSynaptic activity causes local changes in the electrical potential across the plasma membrane of the dendrite. This change in membrane potential will passively spread along the dendrite, but becomes weaker with distance without an action potential. To generate an action potential, many excitatory synapses have to be active at the same time, leading to strong depolarization of the dendrite and the cell body (soma). The action potential, which typically starts at the axon hillock, propagates down the length of the axon to the axon terminals where it triggers the release of neurotransmitters, but also backwards into the dendrite (retrograde propagation), providing an important signal for spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP). \nMost synapses are axodendritic, involving an axon signaling to a dendrite. There are also dendrodendritic synapses, signaling from one dendrite to another. An autapse is a synapse in which the axon of one neuron transmits signals to its own dendrite.\nThe general structure of the dendrite is used to classify neurons into multipolar, bipolar and unipolar types. Multipolar neurons are composed of one axon and many dendritic trees. Pyramidal cells are multipolar cortical neurons with pyramid-shaped cell bodies and large dendrites that extend towards the surface of the cortex (apical dendrite). Bipolar neurons have two main dendrites at opposing ends of the cell body. Many inhibitory neurons have this morphology. Unipolar neurons, typical for insects, have a stalk that extends from the cell body that separates into two branches with one containing the dendrites and the other with the terminal buttons. In vertebrates, sensory neurons detecting touch or temperature are unipolar. Dendritic branching can be extensive and in some cases is sufficient to receive as many as 100,000 inputs to a single neuron.\nHistory.\nThe term \"dendrites\" was first used in 1889 by Wilhelm His to describe the number of smaller \"protoplasmic processes\" that were attached to a nerve cell. German anatomist Otto Friedrich Karl Deiters is generally credited with the discovery of the axon by distinguishing it from the dendrites.\nSome of the first intracellular recordings in a nervous system were made in the late 1930s by Kenneth S. Cole and Howard J. Curtis. Swiss R\u00fcdolf Albert von K\u00f6lliker and German Robert Remak were the first to identify and characterize the axonal initial segment. Alan Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley also employed the squid giant axon (1939) and by 1952 they had obtained a full quantitative description of the ionic basis of the action potential, leading to the formulation of the Hodgkin\u2013Huxley model. Hodgkin and Huxley were awarded jointly the Nobel Prize for this work in 1963. The formulas detailing axonal conductance were extended to vertebrates in the Frankenhaeuser\u2013Huxley equations. Louis-Antoine Ranvier was the first to describe the gaps or nodes found on axons and for this contribution these axonal features are now commonly referred to as the Nodes of Ranvier. Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal, a Spanish anatomist, proposed that axons were the output components of neurons. He also proposed that neurons were discrete cells that communicated with each other via specialized junctions, or spaces, between cells, now known as a synapse. Ram\u00f3n y Cajal improved a silver staining process known as Golgi's method, which had been developed by his rival, Camillo Golgi.\nDendrite development.\nDuring the development of dendrites, several factors can influence differentiation. These include modulation of sensory input, environmental pollutants, body temperature, and drug use. For example, rats raised in dark environments were found to have a reduced number of spines in pyramidal cells located in the primary visual cortex and a marked change in distribution of dendrite branching in layer 4 stellate cells. Experiments done in vitro and in vivo have shown that the presence of afferents and input activity per se can modulate the patterns in which dendrites differentiate.\nLittle is known about the process by which dendrites orient themselves in vivo and are compelled to create the intricate branching pattern unique to each specific neuronal class. One theory on the mechanism of dendritic arbor development is the Synaptotropic Hypothesis. The synaptotropic hypothesis proposes that input from a presynaptic to a postsynaptic cell (and maturation of excitatory synaptic inputs) eventually can change the course of synapse formation at dendritic and axonal arbors.\nThis synapse formation is required for the development of neuronal structure in the functioning brain. A balance between metabolic costs of dendritic elaboration and the need to cover the receptive field presumably determine the size and shape of dendrites. A complex array of extracellular and intracellular cues modulates dendrite development including transcription factors, receptor-ligand interactions, various signaling pathways, local translational machinery, cytoskeletal elements, Golgi outposts and endosomes. These contribute to the organization of the dendrites on individual cell bodies and the placement of these dendrites in the neuronal circuitry. For example, it was shown that \u03b2-actin zipcode binding protein 1 (ZBP1) contributes to proper dendritic branching.\nOther important transcription factors involved in the morphology of dendrites include CUT, Abrupt, Collier, Spineless, ACJ6/drifter, CREST, NEUROD1, CREB, NEUROG2 etc. Secreted proteins and cell surface receptors include neurotrophins and tyrosine kinase receptors, BMP7, Wnt/dishevelled, EPHB 1\u20133, Semaphorin/plexin-neuropilin, slit-robo, netrin-frazzled, reelin. Rac, CDC42 and RhoA serve as cytoskeletal regulators, and the motor protein includes KIF5, dynein, LIS1. Dendritic arborization has been found to be induced in cerebellum Purkinje cells by substance P. Important secretory and endocytic pathways controlling the dendritic development include DAR3 /SAR1, DAR2/Sec23, DAR6/Rab1 etc. All these molecules interplay with each other in controlling dendritic morphogenesis including the acquisition of type specific dendritic arborization, the regulation of dendrite size and the organization of dendrites emanating from different neurons.\nTypes of dendritic patterns.\nDendritic arborization, also known as dendritic branching, is a multi-step biological process by which neurons form new dendritic trees and branches to create new synapses. Dendrites in many organisms assume different morphological patterns of branching. The morphology of dendrites such as branch density and grouping patterns are highly correlated to the function of the neuron. Malformation of dendrites is also tightly correlated to impaired nervous system function. \nBranching morphologies may assume an \"adendritic\" structure (not having a branching structure, or not tree-like), or a tree-like radiation structure. Tree-like arborization patterns can be \"spindled\" (where two dendrites radiate from opposite poles of a cell body with few branches, \"see bipolar neurons\" ), \"spherical\" (where dendrites radiate in a part or in all directions from a cell body, \"see cerebellar granule cells\"), \"laminar\" (where dendrites can either radiate planarly, offset from cell body by one or more stems, or multi-planarly, see retinal horizontal cells, retinal ganglion cells, retinal amacrine cells respectively), \"cylindrical\" (where dendrites radiate in all directions in a cylinder, disk-like fashion, see pallidal neurons), \"conical\" (dendrites radiate like a cone away from cell body, see pyramidal cells), or fanned (where dendrites radiate like a flat fan as in Purkinje cells).\nElectrical properties.\nThe structure and branching of a neuron's dendrites, as well as the availability and variation of voltage-gated ion conductance, strongly influences how the neuron integrates the input from other neurons. This integration is both temporal, involving the summation of stimuli that arrive in rapid succession, as well as spatial, entailing the aggregation of excitatory and inhibitory inputs from separate branches.\nDendrites were once thought to merely convey electrical stimulation passively. This passive transmission means that voltage changes measured at the cell body are the result of activation of distal synapses propagating the electric signal towards the cell body without the aid of voltage-gated ion channels. Passive cable theory describes how voltage changes at a particular location on a dendrite transmit this electrical signal through a system of converging dendrite segments of different diameters, lengths, and electrical properties. Based on passive cable theory one can track how changes in a neuron's dendritic morphology impact the membrane voltage at the cell body, and thus how variation in dendrite architectures affects the overall output characteristics of the neuron.\nAction potentials initiated at the axon hillock propagate back into the dendritic arbor. These back-propagating action potentials depolarize the dendritic membrane and provide a crucial signal for synapse modulation and long-term potentiation. Back-propagation is not completely passive, but modulated by the presence of dendritic voltage-gated potassium channels. Furthermore, in certain types of neurons, a train of back-propagating action potentials can induce a calcium action potential (a dendritic spike) at dendritic initiation zones.\nPlasticity.\nDendrites themselves appear to be capable of plastic changes during the adult life of animals, including invertebrates. Neuronal dendrites have various compartments known as functional units that are able to compute incoming stimuli. These functional units are involved in processing input and are composed of the subdomains of dendrites such as spines, branches, or groupings of branches. Therefore, plasticity that leads to changes in the dendrite structure will affect communication and processing in the cell. During development, dendrite morphology is shaped by intrinsic programs within the cell's genome and extrinsic factors such as signals from other cells. But in adult life, extrinsic signals become more influential and cause more significant changes in dendrite structure compared to intrinsic signals during development. In females, the dendritic structure can change as a result of physiological conditions induced by hormones during periods such as pregnancy, lactation, and following the estrous cycle. This is particularly visible in pyramidal cells of the CA1 region of the hippocampus, where the density of dendrites can vary up to 30%. \nRecent experimental observations suggest that adaptation is performed in the neuronal dendritic trees, where the timescale of adaptation was observed to be as low as several seconds. Certain machine learning architectures based on dendritic trees have been shown to simplify the learning algorithm without affecting performance."}
{"id": "8133", "revid": "26570125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8133", "title": "Dalai Lama", "text": " Dalai Lama (, ; ) is part of the full title \"Holiness Knowing Everying Vajradhara Dalai Lama\" (\u5723 \u8bc6\u4e00\u5207 \u74e6\u9f50\u5c14\u8fbe\u5587 \u8fbe\u8d56 \u5587\u561b) given by Altan Khan, the first Shunyi King of Ming China. He offered it in appreciation to the leader of the Gelug school of Tibetan Buddhism, Sonam Gyatso, who received it in 1578 at Yanghua Monastery. At that time, Sonam Gyatso had just given teachings to the Khan, and so the title of Dalai Lama was also given to the entire tulku lineage. Sonam Gyatso became the 3rd Dalai Lama, while the first two tulkus in the lineage, the 1st Dalai Lama and the 2nd Dalai Lama, were posthumously awarded the title. \nAll tulkus in the lineage of the Dalai Lamas are considered manifestations of the Buddha Avalokiteshvara, the bodhisattva of compassion.\nSince the time of the 5th Dalai Lama in the 17th century, the Dalai Lama has been a symbol of unification of the state of Tibet. The Dalai Lama was an important figure of the Gelug tradition, which was dominant in Central Tibet, but his religious authority went beyond sectarian boundaries, representing Buddhist values and traditions not tied to a specific school. The Dalai Lama's traditional function as an ecumenical figure has been taken up by the fourteenth Dalai Lama, who has worked to overcome sectarian and other divisions in the exile community and become a symbol of Tibetan nationhood for Tibetans in Tibet and in exile. He is Tenzin Gyatso, who escaped from Lhasa in 1959 during the Tibetan diaspora and lives in exile in Dharamsala, India.\nFrom 1642 and the 5th Dalai Lama until 1951 and the 14th Dalai Lama, the lineage was enjoined with the secular role of governing Tibet. During this period, the Dalai Lamas or their Kalons (or regents) led the Tibetan government in Lhasa, known as the Ganden Phodrang. The Ganden Phodrang government officially functioned as a protectorate under Qing China rule and governed all of the Tibetan Plateau while respecting varying degrees of autonomy. After the Qing dynasty collapsed in 1912, the Republic of China (ROC) claimed succession over all former Qing territories, but struggled to establish authority in Tibet. The 13th Dalai Lama declared that Tibet's relationship with China had ended with the Qing dynasty's fall and proclaimed independence, though this was not formally recognized under international law. In 1951, the 14th Dalai Lama ratified Seventeen Point Agreement with China, then in 1959, he revoked the agreement. He initially supported the Tibetan independence movement, but in 1974, the 14th Dalai Lama rejected calls for Tibetan independence, since 2005 he has publicly agreed that Tibet is part of China and has not supported separatism.\nThere is a concept in Tibetan history known as \"mchod yon\" (\u0f58\u0f46\u0f7c\u0f51\u0f0b\u0f61\u0f7c\u0f53), often translated as \"priest and patron relationship\". It describes the historical alliance between Tibetan Buddhist leaders and secular rulers, such as the Mongols, Manchus, and Chinese authorities. In this relationship, the secular patron (yon bdag) provides political protection and support to the religious figure, who in turn offers spiritual guidance and legitimacy. Proponents of this theory argue that it allowed Tibet to maintain a degree of autonomy in religious and cultural matters while ensuring political stability and protection.\nBut critics, including Sam van Schaik, contend that the theory oversimplifies the situation and often obscures the political dominance more powerful states exert over Tibet. Historians such as Melvyn Goldstein have called Tibet a vassal state or tributary, subject to external control. During the Yuan dynasty, Tibetan lamas held significant religious influence, but the Mongol Khans had ultimate political authority. Similarly, under the Qing Dynasty, which established control over Tibet in 1720, the region enjoyed a degree of autonomy, but all diplomatic agreements recognized Qing China's sovereign right to negotiate and conclude treaties and trade agreements involving Tibet. Since the 18th century, Chinese authorities have asserted the right to oversee the selection of Tibetan spiritual leaders, including the Dalai and Panchen Lamas. This practice was formalized in 1793 through the \"29-Article Ordinance for the More Effective Governing of Tibet\".\nAccording to Tibetan Buddhist doctrine, the Dalai Lama chooses his reincarnation. In recent times, the 14th Dalai Lama has opposed Chinese government involvement, emphasizing that his reincarnation should not be subject to external political influence. He has also said that he could reincarnate as a woman or choose not to reincarnate at all.\nNames.\n1578 AD, Dalai Lama, the title Dalai Lama is part of the full title \"\u5723 \u8bc6\u4e00\u5207 \u74e6\u9f50\u5c14\u8fbe\u5587 \u8fbe\u8d56 \u5587\u561b\" (Holiness Knowing Everying Vajradhara Dalai Lama) given by Altan Khan. \"Dalai Lama\" is a combination of the Mongolic word () and the Tibetan word () (). The word corresponds to the Tibetan word \"gyatso\" or \"rgya-mtsho\",\"\" and, according to Schwieger, was chosen by analogy with the Mongolian title or . Others suggest it may have been chosen in reference to the breadth of the Dalai Lama's wisdom. The Dalai Lama is also known in Tibetan as the \"Rgyal-ba Rin-po-che\" () or simply as the \"Rgyal-ba\".\n1587 AD, Du\u01d2 Er Zh\u01d0 Ch\u00e0ng (\u6735\u513f\u53ea\u5531). As requested by the third Shunyi King of Ming China, Chelike, Sonam Gyatso was given title Du\u01d2 Er Zh\u01d0 Ch\u00e0ng (\u6735\u513f\u53ea\u5531) by Wanli Emperor.\n1616 AD, Universally Holding Vajra Buddha (\u666e\u6301\u91d1\u521a\u4f5b), title granted by the Ming Government.\n1654 AD, the Freedom Buddha of the Great Goodness of the Western Paradise Leading the World of Buddhism Knowing Everything Vajradhara Dalai Lama (\u897f\u5929\u5927\u5584\u81ea\u5728\u4f5b\u6240\u9886\u5929\u4e0b\u91ca\u6559\u666e\u901a\u74e6\u8d64\u5587\u601b\u5587\u8fbe\u8d56\u5587\u561b), title granted by the Qing Government. \n1908 Sincere Obedient and Praised the Freedom Buddha of the Great Goodness of the Western Paradise (\u8bda\u987a\u8d5e\u5316\u897f\u5929\u5927\u5584\u81ea\u5728\u4f5b), title granted by the Qing Government.\nRevocation of the Dalai Lama title.\n1705 AD, Tsangyang Gyatso's Dalai Lama title was revoked by the Kangxi Emperor, Tsangyang Gyatso died while being sent to Beijing. \n1904 AD, Thubten Gyatso's Dalai Lama title was revoked temporarily by the Qing Government. \nHistory.\nOrigins in myth and legend.\nSince the 11th century, it has been widely believed in Central Asian Buddhist countries that Avalokite\u015bvara, the bodhisattva of compassion, has a special relationship with the people of Tibet and intervenes in their fate by incarnating as benevolent rulers and teachers such as the Dalai Lamas. \"The Book of Kadam\", the main text of the Kadampa school from which the 1st Dalai Lama hailed, is said to have laid the foundation for the Tibetans' later identification of the Dalai Lamas as incarnations of Avalokite\u015bvara. It traces the legend of the bodhisattva's incarnations as early Tibetan kings and emperors such as Songtsen Gampo and later as Dromt\u00f6npa (1004\u20131064). This lineage has been extrapolated by Tibetans up to and including the Dalai Lamas.\nThus, according to such sources, an informal line of succession of the present Dalai Lamas as incarnations of Avalokite\u015bvara stretches back much further than the 1st Dalai Lama, Gendun Drub; as many as sixty persons are enumerated as earlier incarnations of Avalokite\u015bvara and predecessors in the same lineage leading up to Gendun Drub. These earlier incarnations include a mythology of 36 Indian personalities, ten early Tibetan kings and emperors all said to be previous incarnations of Dromt\u00f6npa, and fourteen further Nepalese and Tibetan yogis and sages. In fact, according to the \"Birth to Exile\" article on the 14th Dalai Lama's website, he is \"the seventy-fourth in a lineage that can be traced back to a Brahmin boy who lived in the time of Buddha Shakyamuni.\"\nAvalokite\u015bvara's \"Dalai Lama master plan\".\nAccording to the 14th Dalai Lama, long ago Avalokite\u015bvara had promised the Buddha to guide and defend the Tibetan people. In the late Middle Ages, his master plan to fulfill this promise was the stage-by-stage establishment of the Dalai Lama institution in Tibet.\nFirst, Tsongkhapa established three great monasteries around Lhasa in the province of \u00dc before he died in 1419. The 1st Dalai Lama soon became Abbot of the greatest one, Drepung, and developed a large popular power base in \u00dc. He later extended this to cover Tsang, where he constructed a fourth great monastery, Tashi Lhunpo, at Shigatse. The 2nd studied there before returning to Lhasa, where he became Abbot of Drepung. Having reactivated the 1st's large popular followings in Tsang and \u00dc, the 2nd then moved on to southern Tibet and gathered more followers there who helped him construct a new monastery, Chokorgyel. He established the method by which later Dalai Lama incarnations would be discovered through visions at the \"oracle lake\", Lhamo Lhatso.\nThe 3rd built on his predecessors' fame by becoming Abbot of the two great monasteries of Drepung and Sera. The Mongol leader Altan Khan, first Ming Shunyi King, hearing of his reputation, invited the 3rd to Mongolia where the 3rd converted the King and his followers to Buddhism, covering a vast tract of central Asia. This brought most of Mongolia into the Dalai Lama's sphere of influence, founding a spiritual empire which largely survives to the modern age. After being given the Mongolian name 'Dalai', he returned to Tibet to found the great monasteries of Lithang in Kham, eastern Tibet and Kumbum in Amdo, north-eastern Tibet.\nThe 4th was then born in Mongolia as the great-grandson of Altan Khan, cementing strong ties between Central Asia, the Dalai Lamas, the Gelugpa and Tibet. The 5th in the succession used the vast popular power base of devoted followers built up by his four predecessors. By 1642, with the strategy provided by his \"chagdzo\" (manager) Sonam Rapten and the military assistance of Khoshut chieftain Gushri Khan, the 'Great 5th' founded the Dalai Lamas' religious and political reign over Tibet that survived for over 300 years.\nEstablishment of the Dalai Lama lineage.\nGendun Drup (1391\u20131474), a disciple of Je Tsongkapa, would eventually be known as the 'First Dalai Lama', but he would not receive this title until 104 years after he died.\nThere was resistance to naming him as such, since he was ordained a monk in the Kadampa tradition and for various reasons, the Kadampa school had eschewed the adoption of the \"tulku\" system to which the older schools adhered. Therefore, although Gendun Drup grew to be an important Gelugpa lama, there was no search to identify his incarnation after his death in 1474.\nDespite this, 55 years after Tsongkhapa, the Tashilhunpo monks heard accounts that an incarnation of Gendun Drup had appeared nearby and repeatedly announced himself from the age of two. The monastic authorities saw compelling evidence that convinced them the child in question was indeed the incarnation of their founder and felt obliged to break with their own tradition, and in 1487, the boy was renamed Gendun Gyatso and installed at Tashilhunpo as Gendun Drup's tulku, albeit informally.\nGendun Gyatso died in 1542, but the lineage of Dalai Lama tulkus became firmly established with the third incarnation, Sonam Gyatso (1543\u20131588), who was formally recognised and enthroned at Drepung in 1546. Gendun Gyatso was given the title \"Dalai Lama\" by the T\u00fcmed Altan Khan in 1578, and his two predecessors were then accorded the title posthumously, making Gendun now the third in the lineage.\n1st Dalai Lama.\nPema Dorje (1391\u20131474), who would eventually be posthumously declared the 1st Dalai Lama, was born in a cattle pen in Shabtod, Tsang in 1391. His family were goatherders, but when his father died in 1398, his mother entrusted him to his uncle for education as a Buddhist monk. Pema Dorje was sent to Narthang, a major Kadampa monastery near Shigatse, which ran the largest printing press in Tibet. Its celebrated library attracted many scholars, so Pema Dorje received an education beyond the norm at the time as well as exposure to diverse spiritual schools and ideas.\nHe studied Buddhist philosophy extensively. In 1405, ordained by Narthang's abbot, he took the name of Gendun Drup. He was recognised as an exceptionally gifted pupil, so the abbot tutored him personally and took special interest in his progress. In twelve years he passed the twelve grades of monkhood and took the highest vows. After completing his intensive studies at Narthang he left to continue at specialist monasteries in Central Tibet.\nIn 1415, Gendun Drup met Tsongkhapa, founder of the Gelugpa school, and became his student. After the death of Tsongkhapa's successor, the Panchen Lama Khedrup Je, Gendun Drup became the leader of the Gelugpa. He rose to become Abbot of Drepung, the greatest Gelugpa monastery outside Lhasa.\nIt was mainly due to Gendun Drup that Tsongkhapa's new school grew into an order capable of competing with others on an equal footing. Taking advantage of good relations with the nobility and a lack of determined opposition from rival orders, he founded Tashilhunpo Monastery at Shigatse, on the very edge of Karma Kagyu-dominated territory, and would serve as its Abbot until his death. This monastery became the fourth great Gelugpa monastery in Tibet, after Ganden, Drepung, and Sera, all founded in Tsongkhapa's time, and would later become the seat of the Panchen Lamas.\nBy establishing it at Shigatse in the middle of Tsang, Gendun Drup expanded the Gelugpa sphere of influence, and his own, from the Lhasa region of \u00dc to this province, which was the stronghold of the Karma Kagyu school and their patrons, the rising Tsangpa dynasty. Tashilhunpo eventually become 'Southern Tibet's greatest monastic university' with a complement of 3,000 monks.\nGendun Drup was said to be the greatest scholar-saint ever produced by Narthang Monastery and became 'the single most important lama in Tibet'. Through hard work he became a leading lama, known as 'Perfecter of the Monkhood', 'with a host of disciples'. Famed for his Buddhist scholarship, he was also referred to as \"Panchen Gendun Drup\", 'Panchen' being an honorary title designating 'great scholar'. By the great Jonangpa master Bodong Chokley Namgyal he was accorded the honorary title \"Tamchey Khyenpa\" meaning \"The Omniscient One\", an appellation that was later assigned to all Dalai Lama incarnations.\nAt the age of 50, he entered meditation retreat at Narthang. As he grew older, Karma Kagyu adherents, finding their sect was losing too many recruits to the monkhood to burgeoning Gelugpa monasteries, tried to contain Gelug expansion by launching military expeditions against them. This led to decades of military and political power struggles between Tsangpa dynasty forces and others across central Tibet. In an attempt to ameliorate these clashes, Gendun Drup issued a poem of advice to his followers advising restraint from responding to violence with more violence and urged compassion and patience instead. The poem, entitled \"Shar Gang Rima\", \"The Song of the Eastern Snow Mountains\", became one of his most enduring popular literary works.\nGendun Drup's spiritual accomplishments brought him substantial donations from devotees which he used to build and furnish new monasteries, as well as to print and distribute Buddhist texts and to maintain monks and meditators. In 1474, at the age of 84, he went on a final teaching tour by foot to visit Narthang Monastery. Returning to Tashilhunpo he died 'in a blaze of glory, recognised as having attained Buddhahood'.\nHis remains were interred in a bejewelled silver stupa at Tashi Lhunpo Monastery, which survived the Cultural Revolution and can still be seen.\n2nd Dalai Lama.\nAfter Gendun Drup died, a boy called Sangyey Pel, born to Nyngma adepts at Yolkar in Tsang, declared himself at the age of three to be Gendun Drup and asked to be 'taken home' to Tashilhunpo. He spoke in mystical verses, quoted classical texts spontaneously, and claimed to be Dromt\u00f6npa, an earlier incarnation of the Dalai Lamas. When he saw monks from Tashilhunpo, he greeted the disciples of the late Gendun Drup by name. Convinced by the evidence, the Gelugpa elders broke with the traditions of their school and recognised him as Gendun Drup's \"tulku\" at the age of eight.\nHis father took him on teachings and retreats, training him in all the family Nyingma lineages. At twelve he was installed at Tashilhunpo as Gendun Drup's incarnation, ordained, enthroned, and renamed Gendun Gyatso Palzangpo (1475\u20131542).\nTutored personally by the abbot, he made rapid progress, and in 1492 at the age of seventeen he was requested to teach all over Tsang, where thousands gathered to listen and give obeisance, including senior scholars and abbots. Two years later, he met some opposition from the Tashilhunpo establishment when tensions arose over conflicts between advocates of the two types of succession: the traditional abbatial election through merit and incarnation. He therefore moved to central Tibet, where he was invited to Drepung and where his reputation as a brilliant young teacher quickly grew. This move had the effect of shifting central Gelug authority back to Lhasa.\nHe was afforded all the loyalty and devotion that Gendun Drup had earned and the Gelug school remained as united as ever. Under his leadership, the sect continued growing in size and influence and its lamas were asked to mediate in disputes between other rivals. Gendun Gyatso's popularity in \u00dc-Tsang grew as he went on pilgrimage, teaching and studying from masters such as the adept Khedrup Norzang Gyatso in the Olklha mountains. He also stayed in Kongpo and Dagpo and became known all over Tibet. He spent his winters in Lhasa, writing commentaries, and spent the rest of the year travelling and teaching many thousands of monks and laypeople.\nIn 1509, he moved to southern Tibet to build Chokorgyel Monastery near the 'Oracle Lake', Lhamo Latso, completing it by 1511. That year he saw visions in the lake and 'empowered' it to impart clues to help identify incarnate lamas. All Dalai Lamas from the 3rd on were found with the help of such visions granted to regents. He was invited back to Tashilhunpo and given the residence built for Gendun Drup, to be occupied later by the Panchen Lamas. He was made abbot of Tashilhunpo and stayed there teaching in Tsang for nine months.\nGendun Gyatso continued to travel widely and teach while based at Tibet's largest monastery, Drepung and became known as 'Drepung Lama', his fame and influence spreading all over Central Asia as the best students from hundreds of lesser monasteries in Asia were sent to Drepung for education.\nThroughout Gendun Gyatso's life, the Gelugpa were opposed and suppressed by older rivals, particularly the Karma Kagyu and their Ringpung clan patrons from Tsang, who felt threatened by their loss of influence. In 1498, the Ringpung army captured Lhasa and banned the Gelugpa annual New Year Monlam Prayer Festival. Gendun Gyatso was promoted to abbot of Drepung in 1517 and that year Ringpung forces were forced to withdraw from Lhasa. Gendun Gyatso then went to the \"Gongma\" (King) Drakpa Jungne to obtain permission for the festival to be held again. The next New Year, the \"Gongma\" was so impressed by Gendun Gyatso's performance leading the festival that he sponsored construction of a large new residence for him at Drepung, 'a monastery within a monastery'. It was called the Ganden Phodrang, a name later adopted by the Tibetan Government, and it served as home for Dalai Lamas until the Fifth moved to the Potala Palace in 1645.\nIn 1525, already abbot of Chokhorgyel, Drepung and Tashilhunpo, he was made abbot of Sera monastery as well, and worked to increase the number of monks there. Based at Drepung in winter and Chokorgyel in summer, he spent his remaining years composing commentaries, making regional teaching tours, visiting Tashilhunpo, and acting as abbot of these four great monasteries. As abbot, he made Drepung the largest monastery in the whole of Tibet. He attracted many students and disciples 'from Kashmir to China' as well as major patrons and disciples such as \"Gongma\" Nangso Donyopa of Droda who built a monastery at Zhekar Dzong in his honour and invited him to name it and be its spiritual guide.\n\"Gongma\" Gyaltsen Palzangpo of Khyomorlungand and his Queen, Sangyey Paldzomma, became his favorite patrons and disciples and he visited their area to carry out rituals as 'he chose it for his next place of rebirth'. He died in meditation at Drepung in 1542 at the age of 67 and his reliquary stupa was constructed at Khyomorlung. It was said that, by the time he died, through his disciples and their students, his personal influence covered the whole of Buddhist Central Asia where 'there was nobody of any consequence who did not know of him.' The Dalai Lama title was posthumously granted to Gedun Gyatso after 1578.\n3rd Dalai Lama.\nThe Third Dalai Lama, Sonam Gyatso (1543\u20131588), was born in Tolung, near Lhasa,\nas predicted by his predecessor. Claiming he was Gendun Gyatso and readily recalling events from his previous life, he was recognised as the incarnation, named 'Sonam Gyatso' and installed at Drepung, where 'he quickly excelled his teachers in knowledge and wisdom and developed extraordinary powers'. Unlike his predecessors, he came from a noble family, connected with the Sakya and the Phagmo Drupa (Karma Kagyu affiliated) dynasties, and it is to him that the effective conversion of Mongolia to Buddhism is due.\nA brilliant scholar and teacher, he had the spiritual maturity to be made Abbot of Drepung, taking responsibility for the material and spiritual well-being of Tibet's largest monastery at the age of nine. At 10 he led the Monlam Prayer Festival, giving daily discourses to the assembly of all Gelugpa monks. His influence grew so quickly that soon the monks at Sera Monastery also made him their Abbot and his mediation was being sought to prevent fighting between political power factions. At 16, in 1559, he was invited to Nedong by King Ngawang Tashi Drakpa, a Karma Kagyu supporter, and became his personal teacher.\nAt 17, when fighting broke out in Lhasa between Gelug and Kagyu parties and efforts by local lamas to mediate failed, Sonam Gyatso negotiated a peaceful settlement. At 19, when the Kyichu River burst its banks and flooded Lhasa, he led his followers to rescue victims and repair the dykes. He then instituted a custom whereby on the last day of Monlam, all the monks would work on strengthening the flood defences. Gradually, he was shaping himself into a national leader. His popularity and renown became such that in 1564 when the Nedong King died, it was Sonam Gyatso at the age of 21 who was requested to lead his funeral rites, rather than his own Kagyu lamas.\nRequired to travel and teach without respite after taking full ordination in 1565, he still maintained extensive meditation practices in the hours before dawn and again at the end of the day. In 1569, at age 26, he went to Tashilhunpo to study the layout and administration of the monastery built by his predecessor Gendun Drup. Invited to become the Abbot he declined, already being Abbot of Drepung and Sera, but left his deputy there in his stead. From there he visited Narthang, the first monastery of Gendun Drup and gave numerous discourses and offerings to the monks in gratitude.\nMeanwhile, Altan Khan, chief of all the Mongol tribes near China's borders, had heard of Sonam Gyatso's spiritual prowess and repeatedly invited him to Mongolia. By 1571, when Altan Khan received a title of Shunyi Wang (King) from the Ming dynasty of China and swore allegiance to Ming, Although he remained de facto quite independent, he had fulfilled his political destiny and a nephew advised him to seek spiritual salvation, saying that \"in Tibet dwells Avalokiteshvara\", referring to Sonam Gyatso, then 28 years old. China was also happy to help Altan Khan by providing necessary translations of holy scripture, and also lamas.\nAt the second invitation, in 1577\u201378 Sonam Gyatso travelled 1,500 miles to Mongolia to see him. They met in an atmosphere of intense reverence and devotion and their meeting resulted in the re-establishment of strong Tibet-Mongolia relations after a gap of 200 years.\nTo Altan Khan, Sonam Gyatso identified himself as the incarnation of Drog\u00f6n Ch\u00f6gyal Phagpa, and Altan Khan as that of Kubilai Khan, thus placing the Khan as heir to the Chingizid lineage whilst securing his patronage.\nAltan Khan and his followers quickly adopted Buddhism as their state religion, replacing the prohibited traditional Shamanism.\nMongol law was reformed to accord with Tibetan Buddhist law. From this time Buddhism spread rapidly across Mongolia and soon the Gelugpa had won the spiritual allegiance of most of the Mongolian tribes.\nAs proposed by Sonam Gyatso, Altan Khan sponsored the building of Thegchen Chonkhor Monastery at the site of Sonam Gyatso's open-air teachings given to the whole Mongol population. He also called Sonam Gyatso \"Dalai\", Mongolian for 'Gyatso' (Ocean).\nIn October 1587, as requested by the family of Altan Khan, Gyalwa Sonam Gyatso was promoted to Du\u01d2 Er Zh\u01d0 Ch\u00e0ng (Chinese:\u6735\u513f\u53ea\u5531) by the emperor of China, seal of authority and golden sheets were granted.\nThe name \"Dalai Lama\", by which the lineage later became known throughout the non-Tibetan world, was thus established and it was applied to the first two incarnations retrospectively.\nIn 1579, the Ming allowed the third Dalai Lama to pay regular tribute. Returning eventually to Tibet by a roundabout route and invited to stay and teach all along the way, in 1580 Sonam Gyatso was in Hohhot [or Ningxia], not far from Beijing, when the Chinese Emperor summoned him to his court.\nBy then he had established a religious empire of such proportions that it was unsurprising the Emperor wanted to summon him and grant him a diploma.\nThrough Altan Khan, the 3rd Dalai Lama requested to pay tribute to the Emperor of China in order to raise his State Tutor ranking, and the Ming imperial court of China agreed with the request. In 1582, he heard Altan Khan had died and invited by his son Dh\u00fcring Khan he decided to return to Mongolia. Passing through Amdo, he founded a second great monastery, Kumbum, at the birthplace of Tsongkhapa near Kokonor. Further on, he was asked to adjudicate on border disputes between Mongolia and China. It was the first time a Dalai Lama had exercised such political authority.\nArriving in Mongolia in 1585, he stayed 2 years with Dh\u00fcring Khan, teaching Buddhism to his people and converting more Mongol princes and their tribes. Receiving a second invitation from the Emperor in Beijing he accepted, but died en route in 1588. As he was dying, his Mongolian converts urged him not to leave them, as they needed his continuing religious leadership. He promised them he would be incarnated next in Mongolia, as a Mongolian.\n4th Dalai Lama.\nThe Fourth Dalai Lama, Yonten Gyatso (1589\u20131617) was a Mongol, the great-grandson of Altan Khan who was a descendant of Kublai Khan and leader of the T\u00fcmed Mongols who had already been converted to Buddhism by the Third Dalai Lama, Sonam Gyatso (1543\u20131588). This strong connection caused the Mongols to zealously support the Gelugpa sect in Tibet, strengthening their status and position but also arousing intensified opposition from the Gelugpa's rivals, particularly the Tsang Karma Kagyu in Shigatse and their Mongol patrons and the B\u00f6npo in Kham and their allies. Being the newest school, unlike the older schools the Gelugpa lacked an established network of Tibetan clan patronage and were thus more reliant on foreign patrons.\nAt the age of 10 with a large Mongol escort he travelled to Lhasa where he was enthroned. He studied at Drepung and became its abbot but being a non-Tibetan he met with opposition from some Tibetans, especially the Karma Kagyu who felt their position was threatened by these emerging events; there were several attempts to remove him from power. Seal of authority was granted in 1616 by Wanli Emperor of Ming. Yonten Gyatso died at the age of 27 under suspicious circumstances and his chief attendant Sonam Rapten went on to discover the 5th Dalai Lama, became his \"chagdzo\" or manager and after 1642 he went on to be his regent, the Desi.\n5th Dalai Lama.\nThe death of the Fourth Dalai Lama in 1617 led to open conflict breaking out between various parties. Firstly, the Tsangpa dynasty, rulers of Central Tibet from Shigatse, supporters of the Karmapa school and rivals to the Gelugpa, forbade the search for his incarnation. However, in 1618 Sonam Rabten, the former attendant of the 4th Dalai Lama who had become the Ganden Phodrang treasurer, secretly identified the child, who had been born to the noble Zahor family at Tagtse castle, south of Lhasa. Then, the Panchen Lama, in Shigatse, negotiated the lifting of the ban, enabling the boy to be recognised as Lobsang Gyatso, the 5th Dalai Lama.\nAlso in 1618, the Tsangpa King, Karma Puntsok Namgyal, whose Mongol patron was Choghtu Khong Tayiji of the Khalkha Mongols, attacked the Gelugpa in Lhasa to avenge an earlier snub and established two military bases there to control the monasteries and the city. This caused Sonam Rabten who became the 5th Dalai Lama's \"changdzo\" or manager, to seek more active Mongol patronage and military assistance for the Gelugpa while the Fifth was still a boy. So, in 1620, Mongol troops allied to the Gelugpa who had camped outside Lhasa suddenly attacked and destroyed the two Tsangpa camps and drove them out of Lhasa, enabling the Dalai Lama to be brought out of hiding and publicly enthroned there in 1622.\nIn fact, throughout the 5th's minority, it was the influential and forceful Sonam Rabten who inspired the Dzungar Mongols to defend the Gelugpa by attacking their enemies. These enemies included other Mongol tribes who supported the Tsangpas, the Tsangpa themselves and their B\u00f6npo allies in Kham who had also opposed and persecuted Gelugpas. Ultimately, this strategy led to the destruction of the Tsangpa dynasty, the defeat of the Karmapas and their other allies and the B\u00f6npos, by armed forces from the Lhasa valley aided by their Mongol allies, paving the way for Gelugpa political and religious hegemony in Central Tibet.\nApparently by general consensus, by virtue of his position as the Dalai Lama's \"changdzo\" (chief attendant, minister), after the Dalai Lama became absolute ruler of Tibet in 1642 Sonam Rabten became the \"Desi\" or \"Viceroy\", in fact, the \"de facto\" regent or day-to-day ruler of Tibet's governmental affairs. During these years and for the rest of his life (he died in 1658), \"there was little doubt that politically Sonam Chophel [Rabten] was more powerful than the Dalai Lama\". As a young man, being 22 years his junior, the Dalai Lama addressed him reverentially as \"Zhalngo\", meaning \"the Presence\".\nDuring the 1630s Tibet was deeply entangled in rivalry, evolving power struggles and conflicts, not only between the Tibetan religious sects but also between the rising Manchus and the various rival Mongol and Oirat factions, who were also vying for supremacy amongst themselves and on behalf of the religious sects they patronised. For example, Ligdan Khan of the Chahars, a Mongol subgroup who supported the Tsang Karmapas, after retreating from advancing Manchu armies headed for Kokonor intending destroy the Gelug. He died on the way, in 1634.\nHis vassal Choghtu Khong Tayiji, continued to advance against the Gelugpas, even having his own son Arslan killed after Arslan changed sides, submitted to the Dalai Lama and become a Gelugpa monk. By the mid-1630s, thanks again to the efforts of Sonam Rabten, the 5th Dalai Lama had found a powerful new patron in G\u00fcshi Khan of the Khoshut Mongols, a subgroup of the Dzungars, who had recently migrated to the Kokonor area from Dzungaria. He attacked Choghtu Khong Tayiji at Kokonor in 1637 and defeated and killed him, thus eliminating the Tsangpa and the Karmapa's main Mongol patron and protector.\nNext, Donyo Dorje, the B\u00f6npo king of Beri in Kham was found writing to the Tsangpa king in Shigatse to propose a co-ordinated 'pincer attack' on the Lhasa Gelugpa monasteries from east and west, seeking to utterly destroy them once and for all. The intercepted letter was sent to G\u00fcshi Khan who used it as a pretext to invade central Tibet in 1639 to attack them both, the B\u00f6npo and the Tsangpa. By 1641 he had defeated Donyo Dorje and his allies in Kham and then he marched on Shigatse where after laying siege to their strongholds he defeated Karma Tenkyong, broke the power of the Tsang Karma Kagyu in 1642 and ended the Tsangpa dynasty.\nG\u00fcshi Khan's attack on the Tsangpa was made on the orders of Sonam Rapten while being publicly and robustly opposed by the Dalai Lama, who, as a matter of conscience, out of compassion and his vision of tolerance for other religious schools, refused to give permission for more warfare in his name after the defeat of the Beri king. Sonam Rabten deviously went behind his master's back to encourage G\u00fcshi Khan, to facilitate his plans and to ensure the attacks took place; for this defiance of his master's wishes, Rabten was severely rebuked by the 5th Dalai Lama.\nAfter Desi Sonam Rapten died in 1658, the following year the 5th Dalai Lama appointed his younger brother Depa Norbu (aka Nangso Norbu) as his successor. However, after a few months, Norbu betrayed him and led a rebellion against the Ganden Phodrang Government. With his accomplices he seized Samdruptse fort at Shigatse and tried to raise a rebel army from Tsang and Bhutan, but the Dalai Lama skilfully foiled his plans without any fighting taking place and Norbu had to flee. Four other Desis were appointed after Depa Norbu: Trinle Gyatso, Lozang Tutop, Lozang Jinpa and Sangye Gyatso.\nRe-unification of Tibet.\nHaving thus defeated all the Gelugpa's rivals and resolved all regional and sectarian conflicts G\u00fcshi Khan became the undisputed patron of a unified Tibet and acted as a \"Protector of the Gelug\", establishing the Khoshut Khanate which covered almost the entire Tibetan plateau, an area corresponding roughly to 'Greater Tibet' including Kham and Amdo, as claimed by exiled groups (see maps). At an enthronement ceremony in Shigatse he conferred full sovereignty over Tibet on the Fifth Dalai Lama, unified for the first time since the collapse of the Tibetan Empire exactly eight centuries earlier. G\u00fcshi Khan then retired to Kokonor with his armies and [according to Smith] ruled Amdo himself directly thus creating a precedent for the later separation of Amdo from the rest of Tibet.\nIn this way, G\u00fcshi Khan established the Fifth Dalai Lama as the highest spiritual and political authority in Tibet. 'The Great Fifth' became the temporal ruler of Tibet in 1642 and from then on the rule of the Dalai Lama lineage over some, all or most of Tibet lasted with few breaks for the next 317 years, until 1959, when the 14th Dalai Lama fled to India. In 1645, the Great Fifth began the construction of the Potala Palace in Lhasa.\nG\u00fcshi Khan died in 1655 and was succeeded by his descendants Dayan, Tenzin Dalai Khan and Tenzin Wangchuk Khan. However, G\u00fcshi Khan's other eight sons had settled in Amdo but fought amongst themselves over territory so the Fifth Dalai Lama sent governors to rule them in 1656 and 1659, thereby bringing Amdo and thus the whole of Greater Tibet under his personal rule and Gelugpa control. The Mongols in Amdo became absorbed and Tibetanised.\nVisit to Beijing.\nIn 1636 the Manchus proclaimed their dynasty as the Qing dynasty and by 1644 they had completed their conquest of China under the prince regent Dorgon. The following year their forces approached Amdo on northern Tibet, causing the Oirat and Khoshut Mongols there to submit in 1647 and send tribute. In 1648, after quelling a rebellion of Tibetans of Gansu-Xining, the Qing invited the Fifth Dalai Lama to visit their court at Beijing since they wished to engender Tibetan influence in their dealings with the Mongols. The Qing were aware the Dalai Lama had extraordinary influence with the Mongols and saw relations with the Dalai Lama as a means to facilitate submission of the Khalka Mongols, traditional patrons of the Karma Kagyu sect.\nSimilarly, since the Tibetan Gelugpa were keen to revive a priest-patron relationship with the dominant power in China and Inner Asia, the Qing invitation was accepted. After five years of complex diplomatic negotiations about whether the emperor or his representatives should meet the Dalai Lama inside or outside the Great Wall, when the meeting would be astrologically favourable, how it would be conducted and so on, it eventually took place in Beijing in 1653.\nThe Shunzhi Emperor was then 16 years old, having in the meantime ascended the throne in 1650 after the death of Dorgon. For the Qing, although the Dalai Lama was not required to kowtow to the emperor, who rose from his throne and advanced 30 feet to meet him, the significance of the visit was that of nominal political submission by the Dalai Lama since Inner Asian heads of state did not travel to meet each other but sent envoys. For Tibetan Buddhist historians, however, it was interpreted as the start of an era of independent rule of the Dalai Lamas, and of Qing patronage alongside that of the Mongols.\nWhen the 5th Dalai Lama returned, he was granted by the emperor of China a golden seal of authority and golden sheets with texts written in Manchu, Tibetan and Han Chinese languages. The 5th Dalai Lama wanted to use the golden seal of authority right away. However, Lobzang Gyatsho noted that \"The Tibetan version of the inscription of the seal was translated by a Mongol translator but was not a good translation\". After correction, it read: \"The one who resides in the Western peaceful and virtuous paradise is unalterable Vajradhara, Ocean Lama, unifier of the doctrines of the Buddha for all beings under the sky\". The words of the diploma ran: \"Proclamation, to let all the people of the western hemisphere know\". Tibetan historian Nyima Gyaincain points out that based on the texts written on golden sheets, Dalai Lama was only a subordinate of the Emperor of China.\nHowever, despite such patronising attempts by Chinese officials and historians to symbolically show for the record that they held political influence over Tibet, the Tibetans themselves did not accept any such symbols imposed on them by the Chinese with this kind of motive. For example, concerning the above-mentioned 'golden seal', the Fifth Dalai Lama comments in \"Dukula\", his autobiography, on leaving China after this courtesy visit to the emperor in 1653, that \"the emperor made his men bring a golden seal for me that had three vertical lines in three parallel scripts: Chinese, Mongol and Tibetan\". He also criticised the words carved on this gift as being faultily translated into Tibetan, writing that \"The Tibetan version of the inscription of the seal was translated by a Mongol translator but was not a good translation\". Furthermore, when he arrived back in Tibet, he discarded the emperor's famous golden seal and made a new one for important state usage, writing in his autobiography: \"Leaving out the Chinese characters that were on the seal given by the emperor, a new seal was carved for stamping documents that dealt with territorial issues. The first imprint of the seal was offered with prayers to the image of Lokeshvara ...\".\nRelations with the Qing dynasty.\nThe 17th-century struggles for domination between the Manchu-led Qing dynasty and the various Mongol groups spilled over to involve Tibet because of the Fifth Dalai Lama's strong influence over the Mongols as a result of their general adoption of Tibetan Buddhism and their consequent deep loyalty to the Dalai Lama as their guru. Until 1674, the Fifth Dalai Lama had mediated in Dzungar Mongol affairs whenever they required him to do so, and the Kangxi Emperor, who had succeeded the Shunzhi Emperor in 1661, would accept and confirm his decisions automatically.\nFor the Kangxi Emperor, the alliance between the Dzungar Mongols and the Tibetans was unsettling because he feared it had the potential to unite all the other Mongol tribes together against the Qing Empire, including those tribes who had already submitted. Therefore, in 1674, the Kangxi Emperor, annoyed by the Fifth's less than full cooperation in quelling a rebellion against the Qing in Yunnan, ceased deferring to him as regards Mongol affairs and started dealing with them directly.\nIn the same year, 1674, the Dalai Lama, then at the height of his powers and conducting a foreign policy independent of the Qing, caused Mongol troops to occupy the border post of Dartsedo between Kham and Sichuan, further annoying the Kangxi Emperor who (according to Smith) already considered Tibet as part of the Qing Empire. It also increased Qing suspicion about Tibetan relations with the Mongol groups and led him to seek strategic opportunities to oppose and undermine Mongol influence in Tibet and eventually, within 50 years, to defeat the Mongols militarily and to establish the Qing as sole 'patrons and protectors' of Tibet in their place.\nCultural development.\nThe time of the Fifth Dalai Lama, who reigned from 1642 to 1682 and founded the government known as the Ganden Phodrang, was a period of rich cultural development. His reign and that of Desi Sangye Gyatso are noteworthy for the upsurge in literary activity and of cultural and economic life that occurred. The same goes for the great increase in the number of foreign visitors thronging Lhasa during the period as well as for the number of inventions and institutions that are attributed to the 'Great Fifth', as the Tibetans refer to him. The most dynamic and prolific of the early Dalai Lamas, he composed more literary works than all the other Dalai Lamas combined. Writing on a wide variety of subjects he is specially noted for his works on history, classical Indian poetry in Sanskrit and his biographies of notable personalities of his epoch, as well as his own two autobiographies, one spiritual in nature and the other political (see Further Reading). He also taught and travelled extensively, reshaped the politics of Central Asia, unified Tibet, conceived and constructed the Potala Palace and is remembered for establishing systems of national medical care and education.\nDeath of the fifth Dalai Lama.\nThe Fifth Dalai Lama died in 1682. Tibetan historian Nyima Gyaincain points out that the written wills from the fifth Dalai Lama before he died explicitly said his title and authority were from the Emperor of China, and he was subordinate of the Emperor of China\nThe Fifth Dalai Lama's death in 1682 was kept secret for fifteen years by his regent Desi Sangye Gyatso. He pretended the Dalai Lama was in retreat and ruled on his behalf, secretly selecting the 6th Dalai Lama and presenting him as someone else. Tibetan historian Nyima Gyaincain points out that Desi Sangye Gyatso wanted to consolidate his personal status and power by not reporting the death of the fifth Dalai Lama to the Emperor of China, and also collude with the rebellion group of the Qing dynasty, Mongol Dzungar tribe in order to counter influence from another Mongol Khoshut tribe in Tibet. Being afraid of prosecution by the Kangxi Emperor of China, Desi Sangye Gyatso explained with fear and trepidation the reason behind his action to the Emperor.\nIn 1705, Desi Sangye Gyatso was killed by Lha-bzang Khan of the Mongol Khoshut tribe because of his actions including his illegal action of selecting the 6th Dalai Lama. Since the Kangxi Emperor was not happy about Desi Sangye Gyatso's action of not reporting, the Emperor gave Lha-bzang Khan additional title and golden seal. The Kangxi Emperor also ordered Lha-bzang Khan to arrest the 6th Dalai Lama and send him to Beijing, the 6th Dalai Lama died when he was en route to Beijing. Journalist Thomas Laird argues that it was apparently done so that construction of the Potala Palace could be finished, and it was to prevent Tibet's neighbors, the Mongols and the Qing, from taking advantage of an interregnum in the succession of the Dalai Lamas.\n6th Dalai Lama.\nThe Sixth Dalai Lama (1683\u20131706) was born near Tawang, now in India. After death of the 5th Dalai Lama, the regent Desi Sangye Gyatso kept death of the 5th Dalai Lama a secret, this allowed him to continue to use the authority of the Fifth Dalai Lama to manage the affairs of the Gelug. Tsangyang Gyatso was picked out in 1685, but his parents were not informed. In 1696, while suppressing the Dzungar rebellion, Kangxi Emperor accidentally learned from the captives that the 5th Dalai Lama had died many years ago. Kangxi severely rebuke the regent for his mistake, the regent admitted his mistake and sent people to Monpa to welcome the reincarnated soul boy in 1697. After 16 years of study as a novice monk, in 1702 in his 20th year he rejected full ordination and gave up his monk's robes and monastic life, preferring the lifestyle of a layman.\nIn 1703 G\u00fcshi Khan's ruling grandson Tenzin Wangchuk Khan was murdered by his brother Lhazang Khan who usurped the Khoshut Khanate's Tibetan throne, but unlike his four predecessors he started interfering directly in Tibetan affairs in Lhasa; he opposed the Fifth Dalai Lama's regent, Desi Sangye Gyatso for his deceptions and in the same year, with the support of the Kangxi Emperor, he forced him out of office. When Lhazang was requested by the Tibetans to leave Lhasa politics to them and to retire to Kokonor like his predecessors, he quit the city. Desi Sangye Gyatso decided to kill Lhazang, he secretly sent someone to poison the food of Lhazang, but was discovered. Lhazang was furious and immediately mobilized a large army to defeat the Tibetan army and killed Desi Sangye Gyatso. In 1705, he wrote a letter to the Qing government, reporting Desi Sangye Gyatso's rebellion and that the sixth Dalai Lama, appointed by Desi Sangye Gyatso, was addicted to wine and sex and ignored religious affairs. He reported the Dalai Lama was not a real Dalai Lama and requested emperor to demote and revoke him. He used the Sixth's escapades as an excuse to seize full control of Tibet. Most Tibetans, though, still supported their Dalai Lama despite his behaviour and deeply resented Lhazang Khan's interference. But Emperor Kangxi then issued an edict: \"Because Lhazang Khan reported to depose the sixth Dalai Lama appointed by Desi Sangye Gyatso, the sixth Dalai Lama is ordered to be sent to capital Beijing.\" In 1706 with the compliance of the Kangxi Emperor, the Sixth Dalai Lama was deposed and arrested by Lhazang who considered him to be an impostor set up by the regent. Lhazang Khan, now acting as the only outright foreign ruler that Tibet had ever had, then sent him to Beijing under escort to appear before the emperor but he died mysteriously on the way near Lake Qinghai, ostensibly from illness, he was 24 years' old.\nHaving discredited and deposed the Sixth Dalai Lama, whom he considered an impostor, and having removed the regent, Lhazang Khan pressed the Lhasa Gelugpa lamas to endorse a new Dalai Lama in Tsangyang Gyatso's place as the true incarnation of the Fifth. They eventually nominated one Pekar Dzinpa, a monk but also rumored to be Lhazang's son, and Lhazang had him installed as the 'real' Sixth Dalai Lama, endorsed by the Panchen Lama and named Yeshe Gyatso in 1707. This choice was in no way accepted by the Tibetan people, however, nor by Lhazang's princely Mongol rivals in Kokonor who resented his usurpation of the Khoshut Tibetan throne as well as his meddling in Tibetan affairs.\nThe Kangxi Emperor concurred with them, after sending investigators, initially declining to recognize Yeshe Gyatso. He recognized him in 1710, after sending a Qing official party to assist Lhazang in 'restoring order'. These were the first Chinese representatives of any sort to officiate in Tibet. At the same time, while this puppet 'Dalai Lama' had no political power, the Kangxi Emperor secured from Lhazang Khan in return for this support the promise of regular payments of tribute; this was the first time tribute had been paid to the Manchu by the Mongols in Tibet and the first overt acknowledgment of Qing supremacy over Mongol rule in Tibet.\n7th Dalai Lama.\nIn 1708, in accordance with an indication given by the 6th Dalai Lama when quitting Lhasa, a child called Kelzang Gyatso had been born at Lithang in eastern Tibet who was soon claimed by local Tibetans to be his incarnation. After going into hiding out of fear of Lhazang Khan, he was installed in Lithang monastery. Along with some of the Kokonor Mongol princes, rivals of Lhazang, in defiance of the situation in Lhasa the Tibetans of Kham duly recognised him as the Seventh Dalai Lama in 1712, retaining his birth-name of Kelzang Gyatso. For security reasons he was moved to Derge monastery and eventually, in 1716, now also backed and sponsored by the Kangxi Emperor of China.\nThe Tibetans asked Dzungars to bring a true Dalai Lama to Lhasa, but the Manchu Chinese did not want to release Kelsan Gyatso to the Mongol Dzungars. The Regent Taktse Shabdrung and Tibetan officials then wrote a letter to the Manchu Chinese Emperor that they recognized Kelsang Gyatso as the Dalai Lama. The Emperor then granted Kelsang Gyatso a golden seal of authority. The Sixth Dalai Lama was taken to Amdo at the age of 8 to be installed in Kumbum Monastery with great pomp and ceremony.\nAccording to Smith, the Kangxi Emperor now arranged to protect the child and keep him at Kumbum monastery in Amdo in reserve just in case his ally Lhasang Khan and his 'real' Sixth Dalai Lama, were overthrown. According to Mullin, however, the emperor's support came from genuine spiritual recognition and respect rather than being politically motivated.\nDzungar invasion.\nIn any case, the Kangxi Emperor took full advantage of having Kelzang Gyatso under Qing control at Kumbum after other Mongols from the Dzungar tribes led by Tsewang Rabtan who was related to his supposed ally Lhazang Khan, deceived and betrayed the latter by invading Tibet and capturing Lhasa in 1717.\nThese Dzungars, who were Buddhist, had supported the Fifth Dalai Lama and his regent. They were secretly petitioned by the Lhasa Gelugpa lamas to invade with their help in order to rid them of their foreign ruler Lhazang Khan and to replace the unpopular Sixth Dalai Lama pretender with the young Kelzang Gyatso. This plot suited the devious Dzungar leaders' ambitions and they were only too happy to oblige. Early in 1717, after conspiring to undermine Lhazang Khan through treachery they entered Tibet from the northwest with a large army, sending a smaller force to Kumbum to collect Kelzang Gyatso and escort him to Lhasa.\nBy the end of the year, with Tibetan connivance they had captured Lhasa, killed Lhazang and all his family and deposed Yeshe Gyatso. Their force sent to fetch Kelzang Gyatso, however, was intercepted and destroyed by Qing armies alerted by Lhazang. In Lhasa, the unruly Dzungar not only failed to produce the boy but also went on the rampage, looting and destroying the holy places, abusing the populace, killing hundreds of Nyingma monks, causing chaos and bloodshed and turning their Tibetan allies against them. The Tibetans were soon appealing to the Kangxi Emperor to rid them of the Dzungars.\nWhen the Dzungars had first attacked, the weakened Lhazang sent word to the Qing for support and they quickly dispatched two armies to assist, the first Chinese armies ever to enter Tibet, but they arrived too late. In 1718 they were halted not far from Lhasa to be defeated and then ruthlessly annihilated by the triumphant Dzungars in the Battle of the Salween River.\nEnthronement in Lhasa.\nThis humiliation only determined the Kangxi Emperor to expel the Dzungars from Tibet once and for all and he set about assembling and dispatching a much larger force to march on Lhasa, bringing the emperor's trump card the young Kelzang Gyatso with it. On the imperial army's stately passage from Kumbum to Lhasa with the boy being welcomed adoringly at every stage, Khoshut Mongols and Tibetans were happy (and well paid) to join and swell its ranks.\nBy the autumn of 1720, the marauding Dzungar Mongols had been vanquished from Tibet. Qing imperial forces had entered Lhasa triumphantly with the 12-year-old, acting as patrons of the Dalai Lama, liberators of Tibet, allies of the Tibetan anti-Dzungar forces led by Kangchenas and Polhanas, and allies of the Khoshut Mongol princes. The delighted Tibetans enthroned him as the Seventh Dalai Lama at the Potala Palace.\nA new Tibetan government was established consisting of a Kashag or cabinet of Tibetan ministers headed by Kangchenas. Kelzang Gyatso, too young to participate in politics, studied Buddhism. He played a symbolic role in government, and, being profoundly revered by the Mongols, he exercised much influence with the Qing who now had now taken over Tibet's patronage and protection from them.\nExile to Kham.\nHaving vanquished the Dzungars, the Qing army withdrew leaving the Seventh Dalai Lama as a political figurehead and only a Khalkha Mongol as the Qing \"amban\" or representative and a garrison in Lhasa. After the Kangxi Emperor died in 1722 and was succeeded by his son, the Yongzheng Emperor, these were also withdrawn, leaving the Tibetans to rule autonomously and showing the Qing were interested in an alliance, not conquest. In 1723, after brutally quelling a major rebellion by zealous Tibetan patriots and disgruntled Khoshut Mongols from Amdo who attacked Xining, the Qing intervened again, splitting Tibet by putting Amdo and Kham under their own more direct control.\nContinuing Qing interference in Central Tibetan politics and religion incited an anti-Qing faction to quarrel with the Qing-sympathising Tibetan nobles in power in Lhasa, led by Kanchenas who was supported by Polhanas. This led eventually to the murder of Kanchenas in 1727 and a civil war that was resolved in 1728 with the canny Polhanas, who had sent for Qing assistance, the victor. When the Qing forces did arrive they punished the losers and exiled the Seventh Dalai Lama to Kham, under the pretence of sending him to Beijing, because his father had assisted the defeated, anti-Qing faction. He studied and taught Buddhism there for the next seven years.\nReturn to Lhasa.\nIn 1735 he was allowed back to Lhasa to study and teach, but still under strict control, being mistrusted by the Qing, while Polhanas ruled Central Tibet under nominal Qing supervision. Meanwhile, the Qing had promoted the Fifth Panchen Lama to be a rival leader and reinstated the \"ambans\" and the Lhasa garrison. Polhanas died in 1747. He was succeeded by his son Gyurme Namgyal, the last dynastic ruler of Tibet, who was far less cooperative with the Qing. He built a Tibetan army and started conspiring with the Dzungars to rid Tibet of Qing influence. In 1750, when the \"ambans\" realised this, they invited him and personally assassinated him. Despite the Dalai Lama's attempts to calm the angered populace, a vengeful Tibetan mob assassinated the \"ambans\", along with most of their escort.\nRestoration as Tibet's political leader.\nThe Qing sent yet another force 'to restore order' but when it arrived the situation had already been stabilised under the leadership of the 7th Dalai Lama who was now seen to have demonstrated loyalty to the Qing. Just as G\u00fcshi Khan had done with the Fifth Dalai Lama, they therefore helped reconstitute the government with the Dalai Lama presiding over a Kashag of four Tibetans, reinvesting him with temporal power in addition to his already established spiritual leadership. This arrangement, with a Kashag under the Dalai Lama or his regent, outlasted the Qing dynasty which collapsed in 1912.\nThe \"ambans\" and their garrison were reinstated to observe and to some extent supervise affairs. Their influence generally waned with the power of their empire, which gradually declined after 1792 along with its influence over Tibet, a decline aided by a succession of corrupt or incompetent \"ambans\". Moreover, there was soon no reason for the Qing to fear the Dzungar; by the time the Seventh Dalai Lama died in 1757 at the age of 49, the entire Dzungar people had been practically exterminated through years of genocidal campaigns by Qing armies, and deadly smallpox epidemics, with the survivors being forcibly transported into China. Their emptied lands were then awarded to other peoples.\nAccording to Mullin, despite living through such violent times Kelzang Gyatso was perhaps 'the most spiritually learned and accomplished of any Dalai Lama', his written works comprising several hundred titles including 'some of Tibet's finest spiritual literary achievements'. Despite his apparent lack of zeal in politics, Kelzang Gyatso is credited with establishing in 1751 the reformed government of Tibet headed by the Dalai Lama, which continued over 200 years until the 1950s, and then in exile. Construction of the Norbulingka, the 'Summer Palace' of the Dalai Lamas in Lhasa was started during Kelzang Gyatso's reign.\n8th Dalai Lama.\nThe Eighth Dalai Lama, Jamphel Gyatso, was born in Tsang in 1758 and died aged 46 having taken little part in Tibetan politics, mostly leaving temporal matters to his regents and the \"ambans\". The Emperor of China exempted him from the lot-drawing ceremony of the Golden Urn. Qianlong Emperor officially accepted Gyiangbai as the 8th Dalai Lama when the 6th Panchen Erdeni came to congratulate the emperor on his 70th birthday in 1780. The emperor granted the 8th Dalai Lama a jade seal of authority and jade sheets of confirmation of authority. The confirmation of authority says:\nThe Dalai Lama, his later generations and the local government cherished both the seal of authority and the sheets of authority. They were preserved as the root of their power.\nThe 8th Dalai Lama lived almost as long as the Seventh, but was overshadowed by many contemporary lamas in terms of both religious and political accomplishment. According to Mullin, the 14th Dalai Lama has pointed to certain indications that Jamphel Gyatso might have been the incarnation not of the 7th Dalai Lama but of Jamyang Chojey, a disciple of Tsongkhapa and founder of Drepung monastery who was also reputed to be an incarnation of Avalokiteshvara. In any case, he lived a quiet and unassuming life as a devoted and studious monk, uninvolved in the kind of dramas that had surrounded his predecessors.\nNevertheless, Jamphel Gyatso was said to possess all the signs of being the true incarnation of the Seventh. This was claimed to have been confirmed by many portents clear to the Tibetans and so, in 1762, at age five, he was enthroned as the Eighth Dalai Lama at the Potala Palace. At age 23 he was persuaded to assume the throne as ruler of Tibet with a regent to assist him and after three years of this, when the regent went to Beijing as ambassador in 1784, he ruled alone for four more years. But feeling unsuited to worldly affairs and unhappy in this role, he then retired from public office to concentrate on religious activities until his death in 1804. He is also credited with the construction of the Norbulingka \"Summer Palace\" started by his predecessor and with ordaining 10,000 monks in his efforts to foster monasticism.\n9th to 12th Dalai Lamas.\nHugh Richardson's summary of the period covering the four short-lived, 19th-century Dalai Lamas:\nThubten Jigme Norbu, the elder brother of the 14th Dalai Lama, described these unfortunate events as follows, although there are few, if any, indications that any of the four were said to be 'Chinese-appointed imposters':\nAccording to Mullin, on the other hand, it is improbable that the Manchus would have murdered any of these four for being 'unmanageable' since it would have been in their best interests to have strong Dalai Lamas ruling in Lhasa, he argues, agreeing with Richardson that it was rather \"the ambition and greed for power of Tibetans\" that might have caused the Lamas' early deaths. Further, if Tibetan nobles murdered any of them, it would more likely have been in order to protect or enhance their family interests rather than out of suspicion that the Dalai Lamas were seen as Chinese-appointed imposters as suggested by Norbu. They could also have died from illnesses, possibly contracted from diseases to which they had no immunity, carried to Lhasa by the multitudes of pilgrims visiting from nearby countries for blessings. Finally, from the Buddhist point of view, Mullin says, \"Simply stated, these four Dalai Lamas died young because the world did not have enough good karma to deserve their presence\".\nTibetan historian K. Dhondup, however, in his history \"The Water-Bird and Other Years\", based on the Tibetan minister Surkhang Sawang Chenmo's historical manuscripts, disagrees with Mullin's opinion that having strong Dalai Lamas in power in Tibet would have been in China's best interests. He notes that many historians are compelled to suspect Manchu foul play in these serial early deaths because the Ambans had such latitude to interfere; the Manchu, he says, \"\"to perpetuate their domination over Tibetan affairs, did not desire a Dalai Lama who will ascend the throne and become a strong and capable ruler over his own country and people\". The life and deeds of the 13th Dalai Lama [in successfully upholding \"de facto\" Tibetan independence from China from 1912 to 1950] serve as the living proof of this argument, he points out. This account also corresponds with TJ Norbu's observations above.\nFinally, while acknowledging the possibility, the 14th Dalai Lama himself doubts they were poisoned. He ascribes the probable cause of these early deaths to negligence, foolishness and lack of proper medical knowledge and attention. \"Even today\" he is quoted as saying, \"when people get sick, some [Tibetans] will say: 'Just do your prayers, you don't need medical treatment.\"\n9th Dalai Lama.\nBorn in Kham in 1805\u20136 amidst the usual miraculous signs the Ninth Dalai Lama, Lungtok Gyatso was appointed by the 7th Panchen Lama's search team at the age of two and enthroned in the Potala in 1808 at an impressive ceremony attended by representatives from China, Mongolia, Nepal and Bhutan. Exemption from using Golden Urn was approved by the Emperor. Tibetan historian Nyima Gyaincain and Wang Jiawei point out that the 9th Dalai Lama was allowed to use the seal of authority given to the late 8th Dalai Lama by the Emperor of China\nHis second Regent Demo Tulku was the biographer of the 8th and 9th Dalai Lamas and though the 9th died at the age of 9, his biography is as lengthy as those of many of the early Dalai Lamas. In 1793 under Manchu pressure, Tibet had closed its borders to foreigners. In 1811, a British Sinologist, Thomas Manning became the first Englishman to visit Lhasa. Considered to be 'the first Chinese scholar in Europe' he stayed five months and gave enthusiastic accounts in his journal of his regular meetings with the Ninth Dalai Lama whom he found fascinating: \"beautiful, elegant, refined, intelligent, and entirely self-possessed, even at the age of six\". Three years later in March 1815 the young Lungtok Gyatso caught a severe cold and, leaving the Potala Palace to preside over the Monlam Prayer Festival, he contracted pneumonia from which he soon died.\n10th Dalai Lama.\nLike the Seventh Dalai Lama, the Tenth, Tsultrim Gyatso, was born in Lithang, Kham, where the Third Dalai Lama had built a monastery. It was 1816 and Regent Demo Tulku and the Seventh Panchen Lama followed indications from Nechung, the 'state oracle' which led them to appoint him at the age of two. He passed all the tests and was brought to Lhasa but official recognition was delayed until 1822 when he was enthroned and ordained by the Seventh Panchen Lama. There are conflicting reports about whether the Chinese 'Golden Urn' was utilised by drawing lots to choose him, but lot-drawing result was reported and approved by emperor. The 10th Dalai Lama mentioned in his biography that he was allowed to use the golden seal of authority based on the convention set up by the late Dalai Lama. At the investiture, decree of the Emperor of China was issued and read out.\nAfter 15 years of intensive studies and failing health he died, in 1837, at the age of 20 or 21. He identified with ordinary people rather than the court officials and often sat on his verandah in the sunshine with the office clerks. Intending to empower the common people he planned to institute political and economic reforms to share the nation's wealth more equitably. Over this period his health had deteriorated, the implication being that he may have suffered from slow poisoning by Tibetan aristocrats whose interests these reforms were threatening. He was also dissatisfied with his Regent and the Kashag and scolded them for not alleviating the condition of the common people, who had suffered much in small ongoing regional civil wars waged in Kokonor between Mongols, local Tibetans and the government over territory, and in Kham to extract unpaid taxes from rebellious Tibetan communities.\n11th Dalai Lama.\nBorn in Gathar, Kham in 1838 and soon discovered by the official search committee with the help of the Nechung Oracle, the Eleventh Dalai Lama was brought to Lhasa in 1841 and recognised, enthroned and named Khedrup Gyatso by the Panchen Lama on April 16, 1842, seal of authority and golden sheets were granted on the same date. Sitting-in-the-bed ceremony was held in July 1844. After that he was immersed in religious studies under the Panchen Lama, amongst other great masters. Meanwhile, there were court intrigues and ongoing power struggles taking place between the various Lhasa factions, the Regent, the Kashag, the powerful nobles and the abbots and monks of the three great monasteries. The Tsemonling Regent became mistrusted and was forcibly deposed, there were machinations, plots, beatings and kidnappings of ministers and so forth, resulting at last in the Panchen Lama being appointed as interim Regent to keep the peace.\nEventually the Third Reting Rinpoche was made Regent, and in 1855, Khedrup Gyatso, appearing to be an extremely promising prospect, was requested to take the reins of power at the age of 17. He was enthroned as ruler of Tibet in 1855, on orders of the Xianfeng Emperor. He died after just 11 months, no reason for his sudden and premature death being given in these accounts, Shakabpa and Mullin's histories both being based on untranslated Tibetan chronicles. The respected Reting Rinpoche was recalled once again to act as Regent and requested to lead the search for the next incarnation, the twelfth.\n12th Dalai Lama.\nIn 1856, a child was born in south central Tibet with all the usual extraordinary signs. He came to the notice of the search team, was investigated, passed the traditional tests and was recognised as the 12th Dalai Lama in 1858. The use of the Chinese Golden Urn at the insistence of the regent, who was later accused of being a Chinese lackey, confirmed this choice to everyone's satisfaction. He was renamed Trinley Gyatso and enthroned on July 3, 1860, after the emperor's edict from Amban was announced. He underwent 13 years of intensive tutelage and training before becoming Tibet's ruler at age 17.\nHis minority seems to have been a time of even deeper Lhasan political intrigue and power struggles than his predecessor's. In 1862 Wangchuk Shetra, a minister the regent had banished for conspiring against him, led a coup. Shetra contrived to return, deposed the regent, who fled to China, and seized power, appointing himself \"Desi\", or Prime Minister. He then ruled with \"absolute power\" for three years, quelling a major rebellion in northern Kham in 1863 and reestablishing Tibetan control over significant Qing-held territory there. Shetra died in 1864 and the Kashag reassumed power. The retired 76th Ganden Tripa, Khyenrab Wangchuk, was appointed regent but his role was limited to supervising and mentoring Trinley Gyatso.\nIn 1868 Shetra's coup organiser, a semi-literate Ganden monk named Palden Dondrup, seized power in another coup and ruled as a cruel despot for three years, putting opponents to death by having them \"sewn into fresh animal skins and thrown in the river\". In 1871, at the request of officials outraged after Dondrup had done that to one minister and imprisoned several others, he was ousted and committed suicide after a counter-coup coordinated by the supposedly powerless regent Khyenrab Wangchuk. As a result, Tibetans fondly remember Khyenrab Wangchuk, who died the next year, as saviour of the Dalai Lama and the nation. The Kashag and the Tsongdu or National Assembly were reinstated, and, presided over by a Dalai Lama or his regent, ruled without further interruption until 1959.\nBut according to Smith, during Trinley Gyatso's minority, an alliance of monks and officials called \"Gandre Drungche\" (Ganden and Drepung Monks Assembly) deposed the regent in 1862 for abuse of authority and closeness with China; this body then ruled Tibet for ten years until it dissolved when a National Assembly of monks and officials called the \"Tsongdu\" was created and took over. Smith makes no mention of Shetra or Dondrup acting as usurpers and despots in this period.\nIn any case, Trinley Gyatso died within three years of assuming power. In 1873, at age 20, \"he suddenly became ill and passed away\". Accounts of his cause of death diverge. Mullin relates an interesting theory, based on Tibetan sources: out of concern for the monastic tradition, Trinley Gyatso chose to die and reincarnate as the 13th Dalai Lama rather than marry a woman called Rigma Tsomo from Kokonor and leaving an heir to \"oversee Tibet's future\". On the other hand, without citing sources, Shakabpa notes that Trinley Gyatso was influenced and manipulated by two close acquaintances who were subsequently accused of having a hand in his fatal illness and imprisoned, tortured, and exiled as a result.\n13th Dalai Lama.\nIn 1877, request to exempt Lobu Zangtab Kaijia Mucuo () from using lot-drawing process Golden Urn to become the 13th Dalai Lama was approved by the Central Government. The 13th Dalai Lama assumed ruling power from the monasteries, which previously had great influence on the Regent, in 1895. Due to his two periods of exile in 1904\u20131909 to escape the British invasion of 1904, and from 1910\u20131912 to escape a Chinese invasion, he became well aware of the complexities of international politics and was the first Dalai Lama to become aware of the importance of foreign relations. After his return from exile in India and Sikkim during January 1913, he assumed control of foreign relations and dealt directly with the Maharaja, with the British Political officer in Sikkim and with the king of Nepal \u2013 rather than letting the Kashag or parliament do it.\nThe Great Thirteenth Thubten Gyatso then published the Tibetan Declaration of Independence for the entirety of Tibet in 1913. Tibet's independence was never recognized by the Chinese (who claimed all land ever administered by the Manchus) but was recognized by the Kingdom of Nepal, who would use Tibet as one of its first references regarding its independent status when submitting an application to join the UN in 1949. According to a Tibetan website, Nepal listed Tibet as a country just as independent and sovereign, with no mention of Chinese 'suzerainty'. Its relations with Tibet were apparently second in significance only to its relations with Britain, and even more significant than its relations with the USA or even India. Nepal established diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China in 1955 and recognized Tibet as a part of China.\nFurthermore, Tibet and Mongolia both signed the Treaty of friendship and alliance between the Government of Mongolia and Tibet. Neither countries' independence statuses were ever recognized by the KMT government in China, who would continue to completely claim both as Chinese territory. He expelled the ambans and all Chinese civilians in the country and instituted many measures to modernize Tibet. These included provisions to curb excessive demands on peasants for provisions by the monasteries and tax evasion by the nobles, setting up an independent police force, the abolition of the death penalty, extension of secular education, and the provision of electricity throughout the city of Lhasa in the 1920s. He died in 1933.\n14th Dalai Lama.\nThe 14th Dalai Lama was born on 6 July 1935 on a straw mat in a cowshed to a farmer's family in a remote part of Tibet. According to most Western journalistic sources he was born into a humble family of farmers as one of 16 children, and one of the three reincarnated rinpoches in the same family. On 5 February 1940, the Central Government approved the request to exempt Lhamo Thondup () from the lot-drawing process to become the 14th Dalai Lama.\nThe 14th Dalai Lama was not formally enthroned until 17 November 1950, during the Battle of Chamdo with the People's Republic of China. On 18 April 1959, he issued a statement that in 1951, the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan government were pressured into accepting the Seventeen Point Agreement for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet by which it became formally incorporated into the People's Republic of China. The United States informed the Dalai Lama in 1951 that in order to receive its assistance and support he must leave Tibet and publicly disavow \"agreements concluded under duress\" between Tibetan and Chinese representatives. Fearing for his life in the wake of a revolt in Tibet in 1959, the 14th Dalai Lama fled to India, where he led a government in exile.\nWith the aim of launching guerrilla operations against the Chinese, the Central Intelligence Agency funded the Dalai Lama's administration with US$1.7\u00a0million a year in the 1960s. In 2001, the 14th Dalai Lama ceded his partial power over the government to an elected parliament of Tibetan exiles. His original goal was full independence for Tibet, but by the late 1980s he sought high-level autonomy instead. He continued to seek greater autonomy from China, but Dolma Gyari, deputy speaker of the parliament-in-exile, said: \"If the middle path fails in the short term, we will be forced to opt for complete independence or self-determination as per the UN charter\".\nThe 14th Dalai Lama became one of the two most popular world leaders by 2013 (tied with Barack Obama), according to a poll by Harris Interactive of New York, which sampled public opinion in the U.S. and six major European countries.\nIn 2014 and 2016, he said that Tibet wants to be part of China but China should let Tibet preserve its culture and script.\nIn 2018, he said that \"Europe belongs to the Europeans\" and that Europe has a moral obligation to aid refugees whose lives are in peril. He added that Europe should receive, help, and educate refugees but that they should ultimately return to develop their home countries. He made similar comments in an interview the next year. He also said, \"If female Dalai Lama comes, then [she] should be more attractive\" because if she looked a certain way people would \"prefer not see \u2026 that face\".\nIn 2019, the Dalai Lama spoke out about his successor, saying that after his death he is likely to be reincarnated in India. He also warned that any Chinese interference in succession should be considered invalid. The Dalai Lama's succession also involves Mongolia, given its strong Tibetan Buddhist ties. The Jebtsundamba Khutuktu, the latest one chosen from Mongolia, is the third most important figure in the Tibetan Buddhist hierarchy, and plays a significant role in the recognition of the next Dalai Lama.\nIn 2020, the Dalai Lama said he did not support Tibetan independence and hoped to visit China as a Nobel Prize winner. He said \"I prefer the concept of a 'republic' in the People's Republic of China. In the concept of republic, ethnic minorities are like Tibetans, The Mongols, Manchus, and Xinjiang Uyghurs. We can live in harmony\".\nIn 2021, he praised India as a role model for religious harmony in the world.\nIn 2023, a video showed the Dalai Lama in the city of Dharamshala, India, asking a boy for a kiss on the lips, and then to suck his tongue. He later apologized and expressed regret through a statement that claimed he \"often teases people he meets in an innocent and playful way, even in public and before cameras\" and \"regrets the incident\".\nResidences.\nThe first Dalai Lama was based at Tashi Lhunpo Monastery, which he founded. The Second to the Fifth Dalai Lamas were mainly based at Drepung Monastery outside Lhasa. In 1645, after the unification of Tibet, the Fifth moved to the ruins of a royal fortress or residence on top of \"Marpori\" ('Red Mountain') in Lhasa and decided to build a palace on the same site. This ruined palace, called Tritse Marpo, was originally built around A.D. 636 by the founder of the Tibetan Empire, Songtsen Gampo for his Nepalese wife. Amongst the ruins there was just a small temple left where Tsongkhapa had given a teaching when he arrived in Lhasa in the 1380s.\nThe Fifth Dalai Lama began construction of the Potala Palace on this site in 1645, carefully incorporating what was left of his predecessor's palace into its structure. From then on and until today, unless on tour or in exile the Dalai Lamas have always spent their winters at the Potala Palace and their summers at the Norbulingka palace and park. Both palaces are in Lhasa and approximately 3\u00a0km apart.\nFollowing the failed 1959 Tibetan uprising, the 14th Dalai Lama sought refuge in India. Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru allowed in the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan government officials. The Dalai Lama has since lived in exile in McLeod Ganj, in the Kangra district of Himachal Pradesh in northern India, where the Central Tibetan Administration is established. His residence on the Temple Road in McLeod Ganj is called the Dalai Lama Temple and is visited by people from across the globe. Tibetan refugees have constructed and opened many schools and Buddhist temples in Dharamshala.\nSearching for the reincarnation.\nBy the Himalayan tradition, \"phowa\" is the discipline that is believed to transfer the mindstream to the intended body. Upon the death of the Dalai Lama and consultation with the Nechung Oracle, a search for the Lama's \"yangsi\", or reincarnation, is conducted. The government of the People's Republic of China has stated its intention to be the ultimate authority on the selection of the next Dalai Lama.\nHigh Lamas may also claim to have a vision by a dream or if the Dalai Lama was cremated, they will often monitor the direction of the smoke as an 'indication' of the direction of the expected rebirth.\nIf there is only one boy found, the High Lamas will invite Living Buddhas of the three great monasteries, together with secular clergy and monk officials, to 'confirm their findings' and then report to the Central Government through the Minister of Tibet. Later, a group consisting of the three major servants of Dalai Lama, eminent officials, and troops will collect the boy and his family and travel to Lhasa, where the boy would be taken, usually to Drepung Monastery, to study the Buddhist sutra in preparation for assuming the role of spiritual leader of Tibet.\nIf there are several possible claimed reincarnations, however, regents, eminent officials, monks at the Jokhang in Lhasa, and the Minister to Tibet have historically decided on the individual by putting the boys' names inside an urn and drawing one lot in public if it was too difficult to judge the reincarnation initially.\nIn his autobiography, \"Freedom in Exile\", the 14th Dalai Lama wrote that after he dies it is possible that his people will no longer want a Dalai Lama, in which case there would be no search for the Lama's reincarnation. \"So, I might take rebirth as an insect, or an animal\u2014whatever would be of most value to the largest number of sentient beings\" (p.\u00a0237).\nThe Dalai Lama is thought to be a type of \"living [Buddhist] god\".\nList of Dalai Lamas.\nThere have been 14 recognised incarnations of the Dalai Lama:\nThere was also a non-recognised Dalai Lama, Ngawang Yeshe Gyatso, declared 28 June 1707, when he was 25 years old, by Lha-bzang Khan as the \"true\" 6th Dalai Lama. He was never accepted as such by the majority of the population.\nFuture of the position.\nThe government of the People's Republic of China (PRC) has claimed the power to approve the naming of \"high\" reincarnations in Tibet, based on a precedent set by the Qianlong Emperor of the Qing dynasty. The Qianlong Emperor instituted a system of selecting the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama by a lottery that used a Golden Urn with names wrapped in clumps of barley. This method was used a few times for both positions during the 19th century, but eventually fell into disuse.\nIn 1995, the Dalai Lama chose to proceed with the selection of the 11th reincarnation of the Panchen Lama without the use of the Golden Urn, while the Chinese government insisted that it must be used. This has led to two rival Panchen Lamas: Gyaincain Norbu as chosen by the Chinese government's process, and Gedhun Choekyi Nyima as chosen by the Dalai Lama. However, Nyima was abducted by the Chinese government shortly after being chosen as the Panchen Lama and has not been seen in public since 1995.\nIn September 2007, the Chinese government said all high monks must be approved by the government, which would include the selection of the 15th Dalai Lama after the death of Tenzin Gyatso. Since by tradition, the Panchen Lama must approve the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama, that is another possible method of control. Consequently, the Dalai Lama has alluded to the possibility of a referendum to determine the 15th Dalai Lama.\nIn response to this scenario, Tashi Wangdi, the representative of the 14th Dalai Lama, replied that the Chinese government's selection would be meaningless. \"You can't impose an Imam, an Archbishop, saints, any religion...you can't politically impose these things on people\", said Wangdi. \"It has to be a decision of the followers of that tradition. The Chinese can use their political power: force. Again, it's meaningless. Like their Panchen Lama. And they can't keep their Panchen Lama in Tibet. They tried to bring him to his monastery many times but people would not see him. How can you have a religious leader like that?\"\nThe 14th Dalai Lama said as early as 1969 that it was for the Tibetans to decide whether the institution of the Dalai Lama \"should continue or not\". He has given reference to a possible vote occurring in the future for all Tibetan Buddhists to decide whether they wish to recognize his rebirth. In response to the possibility that the PRC might attempt to choose his successor, the Dalai Lama said he would not be reborn in a country controlled by the People's Republic of China or any other country which is not free. According to Robert D. Kaplan, this could mean that \"the next Dalai Lama might come from the Tibetan cultural belt that stretches across Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh, Nepal, and Bhutan, presumably making him even more pro-Indian and hence anti-Chinese\".\nThe 14th Dalai Lama supported the possibility that his next incarnation could be a woman. As an \"engaged Buddhist\" the Dalai Lama has an appeal straddling cultures and political systems making him one of the most recognized and respected moral voices today. \"Despite the complex historical, religious and political factors surrounding the selection of incarnate masters in the exiled Tibetan tradition, the Dalai Lama is open to change\", author Michaela Haas writes.\nDespite the tradition of selecting young children, the 14th Dalai Lama can also name an adult as his next incarnation. Doing so would have the advantage that the successor would not need to spend decades studying Buddhism and could immediately be taken seriously as a leader by the Tibetan diaspora."}
{"id": "8134", "revid": "27556023", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8134", "title": "Damages", "text": "At common law, damages are a remedy in the form of a monetary award to be paid to a claimant as compensation for loss or injury. To warrant the award, the claimant must show that a breach of duty has caused foreseeable loss. To be recognized at law, the loss must involve damage to property, or mental or physical injury; pure economic loss is rarely recognized for the award of damages.\nCompensatory damages are further categorized into special damages, which are economic losses such as loss of earnings, property damage and medical expenses, and general damages, which are non-economic damages such as pain and suffering and emotional distress. Rather than being compensatory, at common law damages may instead be nominal, contemptuous or exemplary.\nHistory.\nAmong the Saxons, a monetary value called a \"weregild\" was assigned to every human being and every piece of property in the Salic Code. If property was stolen or someone was injured or killed, the guilty person had to pay the weregild as restitution to the victim's family or to the owner of the property.\nProof of damages.\nProximate cause.\nRecovery of damages by a plaintiff in lawsuit is subject to the legal principle that damages must be proximately caused by the wrongful conduct of the defendant. This is known as the principle of proximate cause. This principle governs the recovery of all compensatory damages, whether the underlying claim is based on contract, tort, or both. Damages are likely to be limited to those reasonably foreseeable by the defendant. If a defendant could not reasonably have foreseen that someone might be hurt by their actions, there may be no liability.\nThis rule does not usually apply to intentional torts (for example, tort of deceit), and also has stunted applicability to the quantum in negligence where the maxim 'Intended consequences are never too remote' applies: 'never' is inaccurate here but resorts to unforeseeable direct and natural consequences of an act.\nExpert testimony.\nIt may be useful for the lawyers, the plaintiff and/or the defendant to employ forensic accountants or someone trained in the relevant field of economics to give evidence on the value of the loss. In this case, they may be called upon to give opinion evidence as an expert witness.\nCompensatory damages.\nCompensatory damages are paid to compensate the claimant for loss, injury, or harm suffered by the claimant as a result of another's breach of duty that caused the loss. For example, compensatory damages may be awarded as the result of a negligence claim under tort law. Expectation damages are used in contract law to put an injured party in the position it would have occupied but for the breach. Compensatory damages can be classified as special damages and general damages.\nQuantum (measure) of damages.\nLiability for payment of an award of damages is established when the claimant proves, on the balance of probabilities, that a defendant's wrongful act caused a tangible, harm, loss or injury to the plaintiff. Once that threshold is met, the plaintiff is entitled to some amount of recovery for that loss or injury. No recovery is not an option. The court must then assess the amount of compensation attributable to the harmful acts of the defendant. The amount of damages a plaintiff would recover is usually measured on a \"loss of bargain\" basis, also known as expectation loss, or \"economic loss\". This concept reflects the difference between \"the value of what has been received and its value as represented\".\nDamages are usually assessed at the date of the wrongful act, but in England and Wales, Pelling J has observed that this is not the case if justice requires the assessment of damages to be calculated at some other date. In \"Murfin v Ford Campbell\", an agreement had been entered into whereby company shares were exchanged for loan notes, which could only be redeemed if certain profit thresholds had been achieved in the relevant accounting years. As the thresholds were not met, the loan notes were not redeemable, but at the date of the advisors' breach of contract this could not be known, only the loan notes' face value could be known. The conclusion was that in this case valuation could not be done until after the profit performance became known. In his judgement Pelling also referred to the case of \"Smith New Court Securities Ltd v Scrimgeour Vickers (Asset Management) Ltd\", a case where continuing misrepresentation affected the appropriate date for damages to be assessed.\nSpecial damages.\n\"Special damages\" compensate the claimant for the quantifiable monetary losses he has suffered. For example, extra costs, repair or replacement of damaged property, lost earnings (both historically and in the future), loss of irreplaceable items, additional domestic costs, and so on. They are seen in both personal and commercial actions.\nSpecial damages can include direct losses (such as amounts the claimant had to spend to try to mitigate damages) and consequential or economic losses resulting from lost profits in a business.\nDamages in tort are awarded generally to place the claimant in the position in which he would have been had the tort not taken place. Damages for breach of contract are generally awarded to place the claimant in the position in which he would have been had the contract not been breached. This can often result in a different measure of damages. In cases where it is possible to frame a claim in either contract or tort, it is necessary to be aware of what gives the best outcome. If the transaction was a \"good bargain\", contract generally gives a better result for the claimant.\nAs an example, Neal agrees to sell Mary an antique Rolex watch for \u00a3100. In fact the watch is a fake and worth only \u00a350. If it had been a genuine antique Rolex, it would have been worth \u00a3500. Neal is in breach of contract and could be sued. In contract, Mary is entitled to an item worth \u00a3500, but she has only one worth \u00a350. Her damages are \u00a3450. Neal also induced Mary to enter into the contract through a misrepresentation (a tort). If Mary sues in tort, she is entitled to damages that put her back to the same financial position place she would have been in had the misrepresentation not been made. She would clearly not have entered into the contract knowing the watch was fake and is entitled to her \u00a3100 back. Thus her damages in tort are \u00a3100. (She would have to return the watch, or else her damages would be \u00a350.)\nIf the transaction were a \"bad bargain\", tort gives a better result for the claimant. If in the above example, Mary had overpaid, paying \u00a3750 for the watch, her damages in the contract would still be \u00a3450 (giving her the item she contracted to buy), however, in tort damages are \u00a3750.\nIncidental and consequential losses.\nSpecial damages are sometimes divided into incidental damages, and consequential damages.\nIncidental losses include the costs needed to remedy problems and put things right. The largest element is likely to be the reinstatement of property damage. Take for example a factory which was burnt down by the negligence of a contractor. The claimant would be entitled to the direct costs required to rebuild the factory and replace the damaged machinery.\nThe claimant may also be entitled to any consequential losses. These may include the lost profits that the claimant could have been expected to make in the period whilst the factory was closed and rebuilt.\nBreach of contract duty - (ex contract).\nOn a breach of contract by a defendant, a court generally awards the sum that would restore the injured party to the economic position they expected from performance of the promise or promises (known as an \"expectation measure\" or \"benefit-of-the-bargain\" measure of damages). This rule, however, has attracted increasing scrutiny from Australian courts and legal commentators. A judge arrives compensatory number by considering both the type of contract, and the loss incurred.\nWhen it is either not possible or not desirable to award the victim in that way, a court may award money damages designed to restore the injured party to the economic position they occupied at the time the contract was entered (known as the \"reliance measure\") or designed to prevent the breaching party from being unjustly enriched (\"restitution\") (see below).\nParties may contract for liquidated damages to be paid upon a breach of the contract by one of the parties. Under common law, a liquidated damages clause will not be enforced if the purpose of the term is solely to punish a breach (in this case it is termed penal damages). The clause will be enforceable if it involves a genuine attempt to quantify a loss in advance and is a good faith estimate of economic loss. Courts have ruled as excessive and invalidated damages which the parties contracted as liquidated, but which the court nonetheless found to be penal. To determine whether a clause is a liquidated damages clause or a penalty clause, it is necessary to consider:\nBreach of tort duty - (ex delicto).\nDamages in tort are generally awarded to place the claimant in the position that would have been taken had the tort not taken place. Damages in tort are quantified under two headings: general damages and special damages.\nIn personal injury claims, damages for compensation are quantified by reference to the severity of the injuries sustained (see below general damages for more details). In non-personal injury claims, for instance, a claim for professional negligence against solicitors, the measure of damages will be assessed by the loss suffered by the client due to the negligent act or omission by the solicitor giving rise to the loss. The loss must be reasonably foreseeable and not too remote. Financial losses are usually simple to quantify but in complex cases which involve loss of pension entitlements and future loss projections, the instructing solicitor will usually employ a specialist expert actuary or accountant to assist with the quantification of the loss.\nGeneral damages.\n\"General damages\" are monetary compensation for the non-monetary aspects of the specific harm suffered. These damages are sometimes termed \"pain, suffering and loss of amenity\". Examples of this include physical or emotional pain and suffering, loss of companionship, loss of consortium, disfigurement, loss of reputation, impairment of mental or physical capacity, hedonic damages or loss of enjoyment of life, etc. This is not easily quantifiable, and depends on the individual circumstances of the claimant. Judges in the United Kingdom base the award on damages awarded in similar previous cases. In 2012 the Court of Appeal of England and Wales noted that General damages in England and Wales were increased by 10% for all cases where judgements were given after 1 April 2013, following changes to the options available to personal injury claimants wanting to cover the cost of their litigation.\nGeneral damages are generally awarded only in claims brought by individuals, when they have suffered personal harm. Examples would be personal injury (following the tort of negligence by the defendant), or the tort of defamation.\nGeneral damages in personal injury cases.\nThe quantification of personal injury is not an exact science. In English law solicitors treat personal injury claims as \"general damages\" for pain and suffering and loss of amenity (PSLA). Solicitors quantify personal injury claims by reference to previous awards made by the courts which are \"similar\" to the case in hand. The Judicial College's \"Guidelines for the Assessment of General Damages in Personal Injury Cases\" are adjusted following periodic review of the awards which have been made by the courts since the previous review.\nThe guidance which solicitors will take into account to help quantify general damages are:\nWhen a personal injury claim is settled either in court or out of court, the most common way the compensation payment is made is by a lump sum award in full and final settlement of the claim. Once accepted there can be no further award for compensation at a later time unless the claim is settled by provisional damages often found in industrial injury claims such as asbestos related injuries.\nStatutory damages.\nStatutory damages are an amount stipulated within the statute rather than calculated based on the degree of harm to the plaintiff. Lawmakers will provide for statutory damages for acts in which it is difficult to determine the value of the harm to the victim. Mere violation of the law can entitle the victim to a statutory award, even if no actual injury occurred. These are different from nominal damages, in which no written sum is specified.\nNominal damages.\nNominal damages are very small damages awarded to show that the loss or harm suffered was technical rather than actual. Perhaps the most famous nominal damages award in modern times has been the $1 verdict against the National Football League (NFL) in the 1986 antitrust suit prosecuted by the United States Football League. Although the verdict was automatically trebled pursuant to antitrust law in the United States, the resulting $3 judgment was regarded as a victory for the NFL. Historically, one of the best known nominal damage awards was the farthing that the jury awarded to James Whistler in his libel suit against John Ruskin. In the English jurisdiction, nominal damages are generally fixed at \u00a35.\nMany times a party that has been wronged but is not able to prove significant damages will sue for nominal damages. This is particularly common in cases involving alleged violations of constitutional rights, such as freedom of speech. Until 2021, in the United States, there was a circuit split as to whether nominal damages may be used if a constitutional violation had occurred but has since been rendered moot. The Supreme Court decided 8\u20131 in the 2021 case \"Uzuegbunam v. Preczewski\" that nominal damages are appropriate means to redress violated rights otherwise now rendered moot.\nContemptuous damages.\nContemptuous damages are a form of damage award available in some jurisdictions. They are similar to nominal damages awards, as they are given when the plaintiff's suit is trivial, used only to settle a point of honor or law. Awards are usually of the smallest amount, usually 1 cent or similar. The key distinction is that in jurisdictions that follow the loser-pays for attorney fees, the claimant in a contemptuous damages case may be required to pay their own attorney fees.\nTraditionally, the court awarded the smallest coin in the Realm, which in England was one farthing, 1/960 of a pound before decimalisation in the 1970s. Court costs are not awarded.\nPunitive damages (non-compensatory).\nGenerally, punitive damages, which are also termed \"exemplary damages\" in the United Kingdom, are not awarded in order to compensate the plaintiff, but in order to reform or deter the defendant and similar persons from pursuing a course of action such as that which damaged the plaintiff. Punitive damages are awarded only in special cases where conduct was egregiously insidious and are over and above the amount of compensatory damages, such as in the event of malice or intent. Great judicial restraint is expected to be exercised in their application. In the United States punitive damages awards are subject to the limitations imposed by the due process of law clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution.\nIn England and Wales, exemplary damages are limited to the circumstances set out by Lord Devlin in the leading case of \"Rookes v. Barnard\". They are:\n\"Rookes v Barnard\" has been much criticized and has not been followed in Canada or Australia or by the Privy Council.\nPunitive damages awarded in a US case would be difficult to get recognition for in a European court, where punitive damages are most likely to be considered to violate .\nAggravated damages.\nSome jurisdictions recognize a form of damages, called, aggravated damages, that are similar to punitive or exemplary damages. Aggravated damages are not often awarded; they apply where the injury has been aggravated by the wrongdoer's behaviour, for example, their cruelty.\nRestitutionary or disgorgement damages.\nIn certain areas of the law another head of damages has long been available, whereby the defendant is made to give up the profits made through the civil wrong in restitution. Doyle and Wright define restitutionary damages as being a monetary remedy that is measured according to the defendant's gain rather than the plaintiff's loss. The plaintiff thereby gains damages which are not measured by reference to any loss sustained. In some areas of the law this heading of damages is uncontroversial; most particularly intellectual property rights and breach of fiduciary relationship.\nIn England and Wales the House of Lords case of \"Attorney-General v. Blake\" opened up the possibility of restitutionary damages for breach of contract. In this case the profits made by a defecting spy, George Blake, for the publication of his book, were awarded to the British Government for breach of contract. The case has been followed in English courts, but the situations in which restitutionary damages will be available remain unclear.\nThe basis for restitutionary damages is much debated, but is usually seen as based on denying a wrongdoer any profit from his wrongdoing. The really difficult question, and one which is currently unanswered, relates to what wrongs should allow this remedy.\nLegal costs.\nIn addition to damages, the successful party is often entitled to be awarded their reasonable legal costs that they spent during the case. This is the rule in most countries other than the United States. In the United States, a party generally is not entitled to its attorneys' fees or for hardships undergone during trial unless the parties agreed in a contract that attorney's fees should be covered or a specific statute or law permits recovery of legal fees, such as discrimination."}
{"id": "8135", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8135", "title": "Dualisms", "text": ""}
{"id": "8136", "revid": "31384714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8136", "title": "Dualistic interactionism", "text": ""}
